colligitur quod nonnunquam eo ipso quod aliqui non a church for security, but rather to defend them by the
traduntur vel pro eis interceditur, defenduntur. Multis religious awe and intercession of this holy place". One
etiam aliis modis potest quis defendi, qui non solum ad gathers from these words that sometimes certain persons
iurisdictionem habentes sed etiam ad quoscunque alios are defended by the very fact that they are not
pertinere noscuntur. Possunt ergo catholici minimi surrendered or that intercession is made on their behalf.
nullam iurisdictionem habentes et etiam maiores multis Indeed someone may be defended in many different
modis defendere papam hereticum impugnantes, quia ways, which are known to pertain not only to those who
interdum eos non tradendo, occultando, ab eorum possess jurisdiction but also to ordinary individuals.
persecutione molestantes verbis multiphariis revocando, Therefore the least among catholics, those who have no
et aliis modis quos longum esset enarrare.
jurisdiction, and also the powerful, may defend the
opponents of a heretic pope in many ways: sometimes by
not betraying them, or by hiding them, or by using all
needed words to convince those who persecute these
opponents to desist, and by other means it would take a
long time to describe.
Et per idem respondetur ad obiectionem quartam, quia One responds similarly to the fourth objection, because
preter defensionem que fit armis sunt multi alii modi there are many other ways of defending the aforesaid
defendendi impugnantes predictos. Cum vero accipis opponents than to use the defense that relies on arms.
quod iniuriam propulsare ad viros perfectos minime And where you suggest that it does not pertain to perfect
pertinet, negatur de multis modis iniuriam propulsandi. individuals to ward off intended injury, this is negated as
Et cum allegas auctoritatem Christi, respondetur to many ways in which such repulsion may proceed. And
secundum Augustinum super Iohannem ut legitur 23 q. when you advance the authority of Christ, the response is
1 c. Paratus, quod dictum Christi preceptum magis est to follow Augustine's commentary on John, which we
ad preparationem cordis quam ad opus. Cum autem read in 23 q. 1 c. Paratus, [col. 891] that the stated
dicis quod armis iniuria propulsatur, verum dicis. Sed command of Christ is directed more towards inner
preter istum modum propulsandi iniuriam sunt alii multi motivation than towards action in the real world. And
viris perfectis et clericis congruentes.
when you say that arms ward off harm, you speak the
truth. But besides this mode of warding off harm, there
are many others, which are compatible with the status of
perfect individuals and clerks.
Capitulum 40
Chapter 40
Discipulus: Considero ex predictis quod isti largissime Student: I reckon from the aforesaid that these theorists
nomine 'defensionis' utuntur, cum dicunt quod use the term "defense" in the widest sense when they say
impugnantes papam hereticum sunt a catholicis that catholics must defend the opponents of a heretic
defendendi, et ideo magis quam prius assertionem pope, and therefore I have a greater understanding of the
predictam intelligo, et tamen adhuc vellem scire an assertion we are discussing than I did before.
amplius quam prius sepedicta assertio explicetur.
Nevertheless I would like to know whether this oft
mentioned assertion might be explained more
extensively than it earlier was.
Magister: Videtur quod ultimate sic valeat explicari. Master: It seems that ultimately the assertion may be
Quilibet catholicus et fidelis impugnantes zelo fidei explained as follows. Every catholic and believer is
orthodoxe papam hereticum, cum evidenter indigent et obligated by necessity of salvation to defend (in a
necessario, vel periculum immineret fidei christiane, manner possible and appropriate to his situation) those
tenetur de necessitate salutis modo sibi possibili et who oppose a heretic pope for the love of orthodox
congruenti defendere, si alius non apparet in promptu belief, when they are obviously and necessarily in need,
quem probabiliter credat velle et posse taliter or when there is imminent danger to the Christian faith,
impugnantes papam hereticum defensare.
if someone else does not readily appear whom the
initially obligated person probably believes to be willing
and able to defend these opponents of the heretic pope.
Discipulus: Quid si quis credat tales ex rancore vel odio Student: What if someone thinks that these opponents
aut alias ex mala radice papam hereticum mala are badly motivated in their attack on the heretic pope,
intentione impugnare, nunquid tenetur eos predicto and are proceeding out of rancor or hatred or out of some
modo defendere.
other evil root, is he then still bound to defend them in
the manner discussed.
Magister: Nullus debet presumere tales papam Master: No one must presume these persons to be badly
hereticum mala intentione impugnare nisi hoc sibi motivated in their attack on a heretic pope unless this
constet legitime et non ex levi iudicio. Si tamen becomes legitimately apparent to him and is not the
constaret sibi quod ex mala intentione papam hereticum result of unsophisticated opinion. If it should
impugnarent, eos deberet defendere ne propter nevertheless become apparent to him that these persons
334

