verbo alicuius iudicis sententiam dici debet appellans, faith, must rather guide one. They reply to the first
tum quia non omnis interest appellare a sententia iudicis inconvenience on this basis. For not everyone who
vel etiam reprobare, tum quia de modo appellandi a verbally opposes the sentence of some judge must be
sententiis iudicum inferiorum sunt posite leges expresse, designated as an appellant, since not everyone is
et ideo qui in talibus non servat huiusmodi leges non concerned with appealing from or even rejecting the
intelligitur appellare. Sed secus est de omni christiano judge's sentence, and because laws have been
impugnante absque verbo appellandi sententiam pape specifically instituted with respect to the procedure one
contra fidem, tum quia cuilibet christiano licet si must follow when appealing from the sentences of
voluerit a tali sententia appellare, quia talis sententia est inferior judges. Therefore someone who does not
preiudicialis omni catholico, et ideo sua interest talem observe these laws in the relevant circumstances is not
sententiam impugnare, et per consequens sibi licet si understood to be appealing. But it is a different matter
voluerit a tali sententia appellare, exprimendo when any Christian opposes a sentence of the pope
vocabulum appellandi; tum quia de modo appellandi a against the faith without uttering a verbal appeal. Any
sententia pape contra fidem non sunt leges speciales Christian is permitted to appeal from such a sentence,
institute, imo secundum leges a tali sententia cum in because this sentence is prejudicial to every catholic and
rem iudicatam transire non valeat non est necesse therefore it is his concern to oppose such a sentence.
appellare, et ideo quicunque sententiam pape contra Consequently he is allowed, if he wishes, to appeal from
fidem latam verbo vel scripto constanter impugnat such a sentence by the utterance of a verbal appeal. But
absque verbo appellandi, intelligitur appellare tertio since no special laws are instituted concerning the
modo et tantum valet secundum rem acsi verbum method of appealing from a papal sentence against the
appellandi proferret. Per predicta etiam patet ad faith (indeed according to established laws it is not
secundum inconveniens quod intulisti, quia inobediens necessary to appeal from such a sentence since it cannot
sententie iudicis inferioris verbum appellandi be legally conclusive), therefore anyone who
nequaquam emittens non intelligitur facto appellare, consistently, in speech or in writing, opposes a papal
quia cautum est in iure quod in hoc casu ad hoc ut sentence rendered against the faith without uttering a
aliquis intelligatur appellans oportet quod infra certum verbal appeal is understood to be appealing in the third
tempus viva voce vel scripto cum debitis circumstantiis acception of the term, and his appeal has as much
vocem appellationis exhibeat. Sed de modo appellandi a substantive validity as if he had uttered the verbal appeal
sententia hereticali pape nichil est in iure statutum. Ideo formula. The foregoing also clarifies the second
eo ipso quod quis facto ostendit se reprobare sententiam inconvenience you had mentioned. For someone who
pape tanquam hereticam, facto intelligitur appellare.
disobeys the sentence of a lesser judge without uttering a
verbal appeal is not understood to be appealing by deed,
because there is a provision in the law that in this
particular case, in order for someone to be treated as an
appellant it is required that he make an appeal in proper
terms within a certain time, verbally or in writing and
with appropriate formalities. But nothing is established
in the law as to the method of appealing from a heretical
sentence of the pope. Therefore by the very fact that
someone overtly indicates that he is rejecting the papal
sentence as heretical, he is understood as appealing by
deed.
Capitulum 26
Chapter 26
Discipulus: Quare non est aliquod speciale statutum in Student: Why is there no special statute in the law
iure de modo appellandi a sententia hereticali pape.
concerning the method of appealing from a heretical
sentence of the pope.
Magister: Huius due cause assignantur. Prima est quia Master: Two causes are alleged for this. The first is that
non est necesse a tali sententia appellare primo modo it is not necessary to appeal from such a sentence in the
vel secundo accepto vocabuli appellationis eo quod talis first or second acception of the term "appeal", in that
sententia in rem iudicatam transire non potest. Secunda such a sentence cannot be legally conclusive. The second
est quia leges fiunt de hiis que sepius accidunt. Raro is that laws are made by reference to events which occur
autem accidit papam ferre sententiam hereticalem, ideo more frequently. And it rarely happens that a pope
non est necesse de hoc legem statuere.
renders a heretical sentence, therefore it is not necessary
to enact a law about it.
Discipulus: Leges generaliter facte sunt de modo Student: Laws have been made in general terms about
appellandi. Quare ergo non sunt leges ille servande cum the appeal process. Why, then, should these laws not be
quis vult a sententia pape heretica appellare.
observed when someone wishes to appeal from a
heretical sentence of the pope.
Magister: Ad hoc responsum est prius. Dictum est enim Master: This has been answered previously. [1 Dial.
317

