presbyteris extitit instituta. Beatus autem Hieronimus
exemplificat de beato Petro et beato Iohanne Evangelista
et de aliis presbyteris per Timotheum constituendis. Ergo
beatus Petrus super alios presbyteros qualescumque ex
ordinacione Christi nullam habuit superioritatem. Ex quo
concludunt quod nullus presbyter ex ordinacione Christi
est superior alio, sed ex ordinacione humana
solummodo.

among the priests from whom blessed Jerome draws
his examples, since after all the above examples
Jerome says, "That one was chosen later, however,
who was set over the rest was done as a remedy for
schism." We are given to understand by these words
that the rule of one priest over others was
established after Christ's decree by the priests
themselves. Blessed Jerome gives the examples of
blessed Peter, blessed John the evangelist, and the
other priests appointed by Timothy. Therefore
blessed Peter did not have by Christ's decree any
superiority over any other priests at all. They
conclude from this that no priest is superior to any
other by Christ's decree but by human decree only.

Item specialiter quod episcopi super presbyteros
superioritatem non habeant ex institucione Christi
auctoritate beati Hieronimi super epistolam ad Thitum
que ponitur dist. 95, c. Olim ostendunt. Ait enim, "Olim
idem erat presbyter qui et episcopus, et antequam diaboli
instinctu studia in religione fierent et diceretur in
populis, 'Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego Cephe',
communi
presbyterorum
concilio
ecclesie
gubernabantur. Postquam autem unusquisque eos quos
baptizaverat suos esse putabat non Christi in toto orbe
decretum est ut de presbyteris unus superponeretur et
scismatum semina tollerentur." Et paulo post, "Sicut ergo
presbyteri sciunt se ex ecclesie consuetudine ei qui sibi
prepositus fuerit esse subiectos, ita episcopi noverint se
magis consuetudine quam dispensacionis Dominice
veritate presbyteris esse maiores et in communi debere
ecclesiam regere." Hiis verbis ut videtur apertissime
affirmatur quod ex institucione Domini inter episcopos et
presbyteros nulla est distinccio. Unde dicunt isti quod
olim quilibet episcopus erat presbyter et quilibet
presbyter erat episcopus, et ideo tota distinccio inter
papam et patriarchas et archiepiscopos et inter episcopos
et presbyteros solummodo est ex ordinacione humana et
non ex ordinacione Christi.

Also, they show in particular, from a text of blessed
Jerome on the letter to Titus found at dist. 95, c.
Olim, that bishops do not have superiority over
priests by Christ's arrangement. For he says
[col.332], "Formerly the same man who was a priest
was also a bishop, and before there were, at the
devil's instigation, schools in religion and it was said
among the people, 'I belong to Paul', 'I belong to
Apollos', 'I belong to Cephas' churches were
governed by a common council of priests. After
each priest began to think that those he had baptised
belonged not to Christ but to him, however, it was
determined throughout the world that one priest
would be put in charge ... and the seeds of schism
removed. ... Just as priests know that by the custom
of the church they are subject to the one who has
been put over them, therefore, so bishops knew that
they were greater than priests more by custom than
by the truth of the Lord's direction and that they
ought to rule the church in common." It seems very
obviously to be asserted by these words that there is
no distinction by the Lord's arrangement between
bishops and priests. So it is that they say that
formerly every bishop was a priest and every priest
a bishop. And therefore the whole distinction
between the pope and patriarchs and archbishops
and between bishops and priests arises not by
Christ's decree but only by human decree.

Capitulum 18

Chapter 18

Magister Quinta assercio predictorum est quod Romana
ecclesia ante tempora Constantini super alias ecclesias
non habuit principatum.

Master: [See Significant Variants, para. 33.]Their
fifth assertion is that before the time of Constantine
the Roman church did not have dominion over other
churches.

Sexta vero assercio eorum est quod Romana ecclesia a
Constantino imperatore super alias ecclesias primatum
aut principatum accepit.

Their sixth assertion is that the Roman church
received primacy or dominion over other churches
from the emperor Constantine.

(5)
The
Roman
Church
did
not
rule
(6) The Roman Church received primacy from Constantine
217

the

others

before

Constantine

