hereticus, bono zelo in principio laborabunt, sed cum perhaps a few doctors, should the pope become a heretic,
venerit tribulatio pro fide sustinenda illi firmissime would at first be active with good zeal, but when
adherebunt.
persecution for maintaining the faith supervened, these
doctors would support the heretic pope most firmly.
Discipulus: Quamvis michi modo appareat quod Student: Although it now appears to me that at the time
tempore futuri pape heretici, si fuerit, non posit sciri qui of a future heretic pope, should he come to be, one will
propter zelum veritatis studio vacare ceperunt, tamen not be able to know which doctors began to follow the
satis videbitur manifeste qui erunt sinceri et fortes fidei path of learning prompted by zeal of the truth, it will
zelatores, ideo redi ad materiam in isto capitulo nevertheless be clear enough which of them are sincere
disserendam et enumera alia vitia quibus doctores de and strong partisans of the faith. Return therefore to the
quibus hic est sermo reputantur impliciti, nec cures matter which is to be discussed in this chapter, and
alias probationes adducere.
specify seriatim the other vices in which the doctors
about whom we are talking are reckoned to be involved.
Do not bother to provide further technical proofs.
Magister: Isti doctores putantur fautores heretice Master: For excusing or agreeing with the erroneous
pravitatis, ambitiosi, avari, adulatores, propter doctrine of a heretic pope, these doctors are thought to be
excusationem vel assertionem doctrine erronee pape collaborators in heretical wickedness, eager for
heretici. Propter perversionem autem aliarum advancement, greedy for gain, sycophants. And for the
doctrinarum putantur invidi, maliciosi, innocentie falsification of other doctrines they are thought to be
persecutores, detractores, diffamatores, calumpniatores, jealous, malicious, persecutors of innocence, disparagers,
falsorum criminum impositores. Unde et in Spiritum defamers, slanderers, imposers of false crimes. Hence
Sanctum multipliciter peccare censentur. Propter they are judged to be sinning against the Holy Spirit in
utrumque autem vitium falsi, mendaces, fallaces, many different ways [Matthew 12:31-32]. And for both
seductores et fraudulenti creduntur.
wickednesses they are believed to be traitors, liars,
deceivers, pied pipers, and swindlers.
Discipulus: Qua pena essent tales plectendi.
Student: What penalty should such persons suffer.
Magister: Respondetur quod tales omnibus penis que Master: The answer is that such individuals should be
debentur vitiis superius numeratis essent merito deservedly afflicted with all the penalties owed to the
percellendi. Unde dicitur quod sunt excommunicati, et vices that were enumerated above. Hence it is said that
ab omni officio deponendi, imo videtur quibusdam they are excommunicated, and must be deposed from any
quod essent curie seculari tradendi vel perpetuo carceri office. Indeed it appears to some that they are to be
mancipandi.
handed over to the secular arm or surrendered to
perpetual imprisonment.
Capitulum 51
Chapter 51
Discipulus: De predictis posset fieri longus tractatus, Student: A long account might be written about the
sed quia cupio quod cito isti tractatui finis imponatur aforementioned matters, but since I wish to bring this
ideo ad religiosos censeo transeundum, de quibus treatise to a conclusion soon, I believe consequently that
interrogo an religiosi qui pape heretico non resistunt we should shift our attention to the issue of the religious.
sint inter fautores pravitatis heretice computandi.
Concerning which I ask whether the religious who do not
resist a heretic pope are to be numbered among the
collaborators in heretical wickedness.
Magister: De religiosis distinguitur. Quidam enim Master: A distinction must be made about the religious.
religiosi regulariter aliquos de fratribus suis ad studium For certain religious, as a rule, send away some of their
theologie transmittunt, pluribus etiam officium brethren to be schooled in theology, and also commit to
predicationis et confessionis committunt, multique ex many the office of preaching and of hearing confessions.
diversis causis per mundum discurrunt et de loco ad Furthermore, quite a few of them travel about the world
locum sepius moventur, magnamque communicationem for different causes, frequently moving from place to
habent inter se quantumcunque sint per mundum place, and they communicate a great deal amongst
dispersi. Unde accidit quod ea que publice fiunt, non themselves even though they are scattered throughout the
solum in curia romana sed etiam in studiis generalibus world. Hence it so happens that they know public events
et in aliis locis frequentibus, facilius, certius et occurring not only in the Roman Curia but also in
distinctius cognoscuntur ab eis.
schools and universities and in other crowded places
easily, certainly, and accurately.
Alii sunt religiosi qui ex consuetudine in certis locis There are other religious whose custom is to
continue residentes loca sua non mutant raroque exeunt continuously reside in certain places, who do not change
claustra sua, nec aliquos de fratribus ad studia vel alia their habitat and rarely leave their cloisters, nor do they
loca transmittunt ac in diversis locis manentes parvam send some of their brethren to schools or to other places.
vel nullam communicationem inter se habere Remaining fixed in various places, these religious are
453

