spectant.

Peter in power and that he was subject to him
neither in administration nor in anything else that
pertains to superiority and power.

Capitulum 16

Chapter 16

Discipulus Non putabam quod pro ista assercione
heretica tot auctoritates vocales sonarent pro ipsa; tamen
nolo nunc plures allegaciones audire, quamvis velim eam
alias magis diligenter discutere. Sed ut contrariam
veritatem catholicam melius intelligam, quomodo eadem
veritas maiorum auctoritatibus muniatur ostende. Michi
tamen nullatenus manifestes quam assercionem reputes
veriorem.

Student: I did not think that so many texts would
suggest that heretical assertion by their wording;
nevertheless I do not want to hear more arguments
for it now, although I do want to discuss it more
carefully at another time. But so that I may better
understand the opposing catholic truth, show how
that truth may be fortified by texts from our
forefathers. Yet do not make clear to me which
assertion you regard as the truer.

Christ did appoint Peter to rule the other apostles
Magister Quod beatus Petrus super alios apostolos
habuit potestatem et primatum a Christo multis modis
ostenditur. Primo sic: ille cuius cure et regimini tempore
apostolorum fuit totus grex Dominicus commissus a
Christo, eciam super apostolos qui tunc erant de grege
Dominico, curam et regimen accepit a Christo. Sed cure
et regimini beati Petri totus grex Dominicus commissus
fuit a Christo, ipso dicente eidem Iohannis ultimo,
"Pasce oves meas", inter has oves et illas non
distinguens. Ergo et apostoli qui extra numerum ovium
nequaquam censendi fuerunt cure et regimini beati Petri
commissi fuerunt.

Master: That blessed Peter did have power and
primacy over the other apostles from Christ is
shown in many ways, firstly as follows. That one to
whose care and rule at the time of the apostles the
whole of the Lord's flock was committed by Christ
also received care and rule from Christ over the
apostles, who were at the time part of the Lord's
flock. But the whole of the Lord's flock was
committed by Christ to the care and rule of blessed
Peter when he said to him at the end of John [21:17],
"Feed my sheep", not distinguishing between these
sheep and those. Therefore the apostles too, who
would not have been considered as outside the
number of sheep, were committed to the care and
rule of blessed Peter.

Secundo sic: illi cui terreni simul et celestis imperii iura
commissa fuerunt tempore apostolorum ipsi apostoli
subiecti fuerunt. Sed beato Petro tempore apostolorum
predicta iura commissa fuerunt, teste Nicolao papa qui,
ut habetur 22. dist. c. 1, ait, "Super petram fidei mox
nascentis erexit qui beato Petro eterne vite clavigero
terreni simul et celestis imperii iura commisit." Ergo
apostoli, qui tunc fuerunt, beati Petri subditi extiterunt.

[It is shown] second as follows. The apostles
themselves were subject to him to whom rights over
both the earthly and the heavenly kingdom were
committed in their time. But in the time of the
apostles those rights were committed to blessed
Peter, as Pope Nicholas attests. As we find in dist.
22, c. 1, he says [col.73], "He who committed rights
over both the earthly and the heavenly kingdoms to
blessed Peter, who carries the keys of eternal life,
erected [the Roman church] on the rock of a faith
then being born." Therefore the apostles, who lived
then, were subjects of blessed Peter.

Tercio sic: caput super alia membra principatum habere
dinoscitur; beatus autem Petrus caput fuit apostolorum,
teste Leone papa qui, ut habetur 19. dist. c. Ita Dominus,
ait, "Ita Dominus noster Iesus Christus, humani generis
Salvator, instituit ut veritas que antea legis et
prophetarum preconio continebatur per apostolicam
tubam in salutem universitatis exiret, sicut scriptum est,
'In omnem terram exivit sonus eorum et in fines orbis
terre verba eorum.' Sed huius muneris sacramentum ita

[It is shown] third as follows. A head is known to
have dominion over other members. Blessed Peter
was head of the apostles, however, as Pope Leo
attests. As we find in dist. 19, c. Ita dominus, he
says [col.62], "In this way our Lord Jesus Christ,
Saviour of the human race, brought it about that the
truth which was previously contained in the
proclamation of the law and the prophets issued
forth from the apostolic trumpet for universal

214

