probare et assertionem contrariam improbare.

the pope which is in truth heretical, although they do not
know this, and to reject the contrary assertion, without
lapsing into collaboration with heretical wickedness and
without committing a mortal sin.
Discipulus: Contra hanc conclusionem et probationem Student: Two objections occur to me against this
eius michi due obiectiones occurrunt. Quarum prima conclusion and its proof. The first of these is that if the
est quod si assertio pape non est dampnata explicite non pope's statement is not explicitly condemned, he must
est propter eam hereticus iudicandus. Ergo impugnantes not be judged a heretic on its account. Therefore those
papam propter eam asserendo eum esse hereticum sunt who oppose the pope because of this statement, claiming
merito confutandi. Secunda obiectio est contra hoc that he is a heretic, are deservedly to be silenced. The
quod dicitur et innuitur quod licet predicatores et second objection is directed against the stated insinuation
doctores conentur auctoritatibus et rationibus improbare that even though preachers and doctors were to attempt
assertionem impugnantium hereticam assertionem by authorities and arguments to refute the contention of
pape, non sunt censendi fautores heretice pravitatis. those who attack the pope's heretical statement, they
Hoc enim non videtur verum. Nam nullus potest plus must not be judged to be collaborators in heretical
favere heretice pravitati quam conando eam wickedness. This indeed does not seem true. For no one
auctoritatibus et rationibus approbare et ostendere can favour heretical wickedness to a greater extent than
veram esse. Si ergo aliqui moliuntur rationibus et by attempting its commendation, and by demonstrating
auctoritatibus comprobare assertionem pape heretici its veracity through authorities and arguments. If
que est heretica esse veram et assertionem contrariam therefore some try to confirm by arguments and
esse falsam, videtur quod censendi sunt fautores authorities that a heretical assertion of a heretical pope is
heretice pravitatis.
true and that the contrary assertion is false, it appears that
they must be viewed as collaborators in heretical
wickedness.
Magister: Ad primam respondetur quod licet assertio Master: The answer to the first objection is that even if
pape non sit dampnata explicite, in casu est licitum the pope's assertion is not explicitly condemned, it is
asserere et tenere papam esse hereticum. Ad cuius permissible in a particular situation to contend and to
evidentiam dicitur esse sciendum quod si assertio pape hold that the pope is a heretic. The following clarification
non est dampnata explicite, aut papa eam tenet is stated as evidence for this point. If the pope's assertion
solummodo opinando (et tunc licet scientibus in rei is not explicitly condemned, then either the pope holds it
veritate eam esse hereticam asserere quod est heretica as a mere opinion (and it is then permitted to those who
sed non licet eis dicere nec asserere papam esse know in truth that the assertion is heretical to contend
hereticum, quia ex quo papa solummodo opinando dicit that it is so, but they are not permitted to state or to
eam non est hereticus reputandus), aut papa talem contend that the pope is a heretic - because of the fact
heresim non dampnatam explicite non opinando sed that the pope only utters this assertion as an opinion he is
pertinaciter asserendo tenet, que pertinacia, sicut patet not to be reckoned a heretic), or else the pope holds such
ex libro quarto huius, potest diversimode deprehendi, et a heresy (which is not explicitly condemned) not as an
in hoc casu licet catholicis scientibus papam heresim opinion but as a pertinacious assertion. Such pertinacity,
dampnatam solummodo implicite pertinaciter asserere and Book Four of our treatise makes this clear [1 Dial. 4,
et tenere, non tantummodo affirmare assertionem pape passim], may be discovered in many ways, and in that
esse hereticam, sed licet eis sentire quod papa est case Catholics who know that the pope is pertinaciously
hereticus. Periculose tamen hoc publice assererent quia asserting and holding a heresy which is only condemned
forte hoc probare non possent, et forsan extra concilium implicitly are allowed not merely to claim that the pope's
generale et in absentia catholice pape, quamvis esset assertion is heretical, but are allowed to believe that the
verum non deberent hoc publice affirmare.
pope himself is a heretic. However it would be dangerous
for them to proclaim this publicly because they might
not, perhaps, be able to prove it, and perhaps they ought
not to publicly claim this outside of a general council and
in the absence of a catholic pope, even if it were true.
Ad secundam obiectionem respondetur quod ad The answer to the second objection is that in order to be
fautoriam heresis que non est dampnata explicite non an abettor of a heresy which is not explicitly condemned
sufficit quod quis eandem rationibus et auctoritatibus it is not sufficient that someone attempt to fortify it with
munire conetur, sed ultra hoc requiritur quod arguments and authorities, but there is a wider
pertinaciter seu inique talem heresim rationibus et requirement that he attempt to bolster or otherwise fortify
auctoritatibus fulcire sive alias munire conetur, such heresy with arguments and authorities in a
quemadmodum ad hereticam pravitatem non sufficit pertinacious and wicked manner. Similarly, in order for
quod quis errando heresi adhereat, sed requiritur quod heretical wickedness to exist it is not sufficient that
pertinaciter adhereat.
someone should erroneously support heresy, but it is
required that he support it pertinaciously.
449

