iniquo dampno, tunc tenetur homo ad testificandum. Et punishment, or from a false defamation, or even from an
si eius testimonium non requiratur, tenetur facere quod inequitable fine, then a man is obligated to testify. And if
in se est ut veritatem annunciet alicui qui ad hoc possit his testimony is not requested, he is bound to do what he
prodesse. Dicitur enim in Psalmo 81: 'eripite pauperem, can to reveal the truth to someone who might be helpful
et egenum de manu peccatoris liberate', et Prov. 24: in this. For it is said in Psalms 81: 'deliver the poor and
'erue eos qui ducuntur ad mortem', et Rom. 1 dicitur: needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked' [Psalms
'digni sunt morte non solum qui faciunt sed etiam qui 81:4], and in Proverbs 24: 'deliver them that are drawn
consentiunt facientibus', ubi glossa dicit quod unto death' [Proverbs 24:11], and in Romans 1 it is said:
'consentire est tacere cum possis redarguere'". Ex 'are worthy of death not only they who act but also they
quibus patet quod testis tenetur testimonium perhibere who consent to the actors' [Romans 1:32], where the
veritati quandoque quamvis per superiorem minime gloss states that 'to consent is to remain silent when you
compellatur, et per auctoritates quas iste adducit can prove a statement untrue' [Glossa ordinaria to the
ostenditur quod predicatores et doctores in suis Bible]". It is evident from this that sometimes a witness
sermonibus et lectionibus tenentur si possunt auditores is bound to testify to the truth although not compelled to
suos ne incidant in perfidiam pape heretici preservare, do so by a superior. And by the authorities which he
quia ad eundem spectat aliquem ab ingruente periculo (Aquinas) provides one shows that in their sermons and
liberare ad quem spectat alium a periculo in quod lectures preachers and doctors are obligated, if they can,
incidit si potest eripere.
to preserve their audiences from falling into the
faithlessness of a heretical pope, because it pertains to
the same person to liberate someone from a threatening
danger, to whom it pertains if he can to rescue someone
from a danger in which that individual has already fallen.
Discipulus: Adhuc alias rationes ad conclusionem Student: Continue to present arguments in favour of the
principalem allega.
main conclusion.
Magister: Septimo probatur eadem conclusio sic. Sicut Master: The seventh proof for that conclusion is this. As
advocatus patrocinium cause iuste prestare tenetur ita a lawyer is bound to present a patron's (=defender's) plea
predicatores et doctores veritatem catholicam docere et on behalf of a just cause, so are preachers and doctors
pravitatem hereticam reprobare tenentur. Sed advocatus bound to teach catholic truth and to condemn heretical
cause catholicorum contra papam hereticum wickedness. But the advocate of the Catholics' cause
patrocinium prestare tenetur, quia advocatus against a heretic pope is obligated to plea as their legal
patrocinium prestare tenetur cause pauperum. Hoc enim patron. Note that a lawyer must plead as an unpaid
est opus misericordie ad quod pro loco et tempore et patron in a cause involving the poor, since that is an act
aliis circumstantiis debitis observatis quilibet obligatur. of compassion to which everyone is obligated depending
Ergo multo magis debet advocatus cause catholicorum on time and place, and taking account of appropriate
contra papam hereticum patrocinium et defensionem circumstances. Therefore all the more must the advocate
impendere eo quod causa fidei est cause cuiuscunque of the Catholics' cause against a heretic pope provide
pauperis preferenda. Ergo consimiliter predicatores et them defence and patronage, given that the cause of faith
doctores in suis sermonibus et lectionibus debent is more important than the cause of any poor individual.
prestando patrocinium cause fidei papam hereticum Similarly therefore preachers and doctors are obligated to
eiusque doctrinam erroneam confutare.
refute a heretic pope and his false doctrine in their
sermons and lectures by providing a patron's plea for the
cause of faith.
Discipulus: Non videtur quod advocatus semper Student: It is not apparent that a lawyer must always be
teneatur causis pauperum patrocinium impartiri, quia available as a free patron in causes involving the poor,
tunc oporteret ipsum omnia alia negotia sua et aliorum since it might then be demanded that he abandon all his
dimittere, et eadem ratione non semper tenentur other causes on behalf of other clients. For the same
predicatores et doctores perfidiam pape heretici reason preachers and doctors are not always bound to
reprobare.
condemn the treachery of a heretic pope.
Magister: Non intendunt isti quod semper advocatus Master: These commentators do not argue that a lawyer
causis pauperum patrocinium teneatur impendere, nec is bound at all times to provide a financially unrewarded
quod semper omnes predicatores et doctores papam defence to the causes of the poor, nor that preachers and
hereticum debeant in suis lectionibus et predicationibus doctors must at all times condemn a heretic pope in their
reprobare, sed intendunt quod sicut advocatus quando lectures and sermons. Their point is that a lawyer is
non apparet in promptu quod per alium modum quam bound by necessity of salvation to provide a free defence
per suum iuvamen potest causa pauperis sublevari, tunc to a poor individual when it is readily apparent that the
de necessitate salutis ei tenetur patrocinium exhibere. cause of this poor person cannot be alleviated except
Ita predicatores et doctores oportet viriliter pape through such assistance. In the same fashion it is proper
heretico obviare quando non apparent alii in promptu for preachers and doctors to courageously confront a
qui causam fidei velint et valeant contra papam heretic pope when it is readily apparent that there are no
441

