potest (di. 96 Duo sunt) ergo etc. Quarto quia qui potest Venerabilem)[col. 79], therefore etc. Third: because the
deponi ab alio est inferior eo. Imperator autem potest emperor is inferior to one who can bind him by a
deponi a papa (15 q. 6 c. Alius) ergo etc. Quinto quia sentence of excommunication; and this the pope can do
imperator est inferior illo qui in temporalibus et (di. 96, c. Duo sunt)[col. 10], therefore etc. Fourth:
spiritualibus potest subditos imperatorum et regum because he who can be deposed by another is that
legitimare. Hoc potest papa (Extra Qui filii sint legitimi person's inferior; but the emperor may be deposed by the
c. Per venerabilem) igitur etc.
pope (15 q. 6 c. Alius)[col. 756], therefore etc. Fifth:
because the emperor is inferior to one who can
legitimize the subjects of emperors and kings in
temporal and spiritual affairs; and this the pope can do
(Extra, Qui filii sint legitimi c. Per venerabilem)[col.
714], therefore etc.
Capitulum 7
Chapter 7
Discipulus: Omittas istam materiam et alias rationes Student:Ignore this material and bring in other
adducas ad probandum quod imperator non est iudex arguments to prove that the emperor is not the normal
ordinarius pape.
judge of the pope.
Magister: Secunda ratio principalis ad hoc talis est. Master: Here is the second main argument to this effect.
Imperator non est iudex ordinarius illius qui The emperor is not the normal judge of one who is
imperialibus legibus est solutus, quia leges superioris unfettered by imperial laws, since the laws of a superior
subiectos astringunt nisi specialiter per superiorem sint constrain the subjects unless they are specifically given
exempti. Papa autem legibus imperialibus minime est immunity by the superior. But the pope is not at all
astrictus (di. 10 c. 1 et c. Quoniam) ergo imperator non bound by imperial laws (di. 10 c. 1[col. 19] and c.
est iudex ordinarius pape. Tertia ratio est haec. Quoniam)[col. 21]. Therefore the emperor is not the
Imperator non est iudex ordinarius aliorum clericorum normal judge of the pope. The third argument is this: the
inferiorum ergo multo magis non est iudex ordinarius emperor is not the normal judge of other clerks of
pape. Consequentia est evidens. Antecedens vero per inferior rank; therefore all the more is he not the normal
innumeros sacros canones posset ostendi. Vnde in judge of the pope. The deduction is obvious, while the
concilio Carthaginensi ut habetur 11 q. 1 c. Placuit, sic antecedent may be shown by countless holy canons.
legitur: "placuit ut quicumque ab imperatore cognitione From which we read thus in [the acts of] the council of
publicorum iudiciorum petierit honore proprio privetur". Carthage (we have it in 11 q. 1 c. Placuit)[col. 629]: "It
Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod imperator non est iudex was resolved that whoever should petition of the
ordinarius clericorum igitur etc. Quarta ratio est haec. emperor a decision in public lawcourts will be deprived
Ille non est iudex ordinarius pape ad quem a papa of his particular office." One gathers from these words
appellare non licet. Sed non licet appellare a papa ad that the emperor is not the normal judge of clerks,
imperatorem (9 q. 3 c. Ipsi et c. Cuncta). Igitur therefore etc. The fourth argument is this: he to whom an
imperator non est iudex ordinarius pape. Quinta ratio est appeal from the pope is not permitted is not the normal
haec. Imperator non est iudex illius cui Christus iura judge of the pope; but it is not allowed to appeal from
imperii commisit.Christus autem commisit iura imperii the pope to the emperor ( 9 q. 3 c. Ipsi[col. 611] and c.
beato Petro et eius successoribus (di. 22 c. 1) ergo Cuncta[col. 611]), therefore the emperor is not the
imperator non est iudex ordinarius pape.
normal judge of the pope. The fifth argument is this: the
emperor is not the judge of one to whom Christ
entrusted the rights of the empire. Christ however
entrusted the rights of the empire to blessed Peter and to
his successors (di. 22 c. 1)[col. 73], therefore the
emperor is not the normal judge of the pope.
Capitulum 8
Chapter 8
Discipulus: Licet non dubitem nullum mortalium esse Student: Although I would not doubt that none among
superiorem summo pontifice, tamen cupio scire mortals is superior to the supreme pontiff, I want to
quomodo ad rationes hoc probantes adversarii know all the same the manner in which opponents
respondere conantur.
attempt to answer the arguments which demonstrate this.
Magister: Non omnes qui tenent imperatorem esse Master: Not all who hold that the emperor is the pope's
superiorem et iudicem ordinarium pape in modo superior and his normal judge agree on how to formulate
ponendi concordant, et ideo non eodem modo ad the point and therefore they do not reply to the
rationes prescriptas respondent.
aforewritten arguments in the same way.
Discipulus: Dic illos diversos modos ponendi.
Student: State those various formulations.
Magister: Sunt quidam dicentes quod papa in Master: There are some who say [John of Paris, ch. 13]
spiritualibus imperatori minime est subiectus sed that the pope is in no way subject to the emperor in
quantum ad iurisdictionem temporalem est sibi spiritual affairs yet is subject to him as to temporal
279

