et articulos fidei rite distinguere. Sed hoc spectat ad appointing the creed of the faith and duly distinguishing
summum pontificem, qui auctor est scientie the articles of faith. But this pertains to the highest
canonistarum. Ergo ad scientiam canonistarum, et per pontiff, who is the author of the science of the canonists.
consequens ad ipsos, principalius quam ad theologos, It pertains to the science of the canonists, therefore, and
pertinet diffinire que assertio catholica, que heretica, consequently more chiefly to them than to theologians,
debeat reputari.
to define which assertion should be regarded as catholic,
which heretical.
Capitulum 2
Chapter 2
Magister: PORRO ALII indubitanter tenent quod ad Master: OTHERS, HOWEVER, hold without doubt
theologos spectat non per modum diffinitionis that it pertains to theologians chiefly to decide, not by
authentice sed per modum doctrine principaliter diffinire way of an authoritative decision but by way of teaching,
que assertio catholica, que heretica, sit censenda, et which assertion should be considered as catholic and
quod ad canonistas non pertinet nisi in quantum eorum which heretical, and that it does not pertain to canonists,
scientia aliqua ad fidem spectantia a theologia except in so far as their science is known to borrow
dignoscitur mendicare .
some things pertaining to faith from theology. They try
to confirm this assertion of theirs with arguments.
Hanc autem suam assertionem rationibus confirmare The first of them is this. To decide by way of teaching
nituntur, quarum prima hec est. Ad illius scientie which assertion should be regarded as catholic, which
tractatores propter quam solummodo dicitur quecunque heretical, pertains chiefly to the experts on that science
assertio catholica vel heretica principaliter pertinet on account of which alone any assertion is said to be
diffinire per modum doctrine que assertio est catholica, catholic or heretical. But it is on account of theology
que heretica , reputanda. Sed propter theologiam alone that any assertion whatsoever should be called
solummodo quecunque assertio est catholica vel heretica catholic or heretical. For only an assertion which is
nuncupanda. Illa enim sola assertio que est consona consonant with theology is truly catholic , and only one
theologie est vere catholica , illa vero sola que theologie which is known to be opposed to theology is known to
noscitur adversari heretica esse dignoscitur ---si enim be heretical. For if some assertion were found to be
aliqua assertio quibuscumque decretis summorum opposed to decrees of the highest pontiffs, or also of
pontificum vel etiam generalium conciliorum aut etiam general councils or also to laws of the emperors,
legibus imperatorum inveniretur adversa, si theologie neverthelss, if it were not in conflict with theology, even
nullatenus obviaret, quamvis pro falsa , erronea vel if it could be considered false, erroneous or unjust, it
iniqua posset haberi, non tamen deberet inter hereses should not be counted as a heresy. Therefore it pertains
computari. Ergo ad theologie tractatores principaliter chiefly to those who treat of theology to decide by way
pertinet diffinire per modum doctrine que assertio of teaching which assertion should be considered as
catholica, que heretica, est censenda.
catholic, which heretical.
Secunda ratio est hec . Ad illius scientie tractatores in The second argument is this. To define by way of
qua explicite et complete traditur regula fidei orthodoxe teaching which assertion is to be regarded as catholic,
principaliter pertinet diffinire per modum doctrine que which as heretical, pertains chiefly to those who treat of
assertio catholica, que heretica, est censenda . the science in which the rule of orthodox faith is
Huiusmodi autem est scientia theologie, non scientia explicitly and completely handed down . Such is the
canonistarum. Multa enim ad fidem nostram spectantia science of theology, however, not the science of the
in theologia reperiuntur explicite de quibus in scientia canonists. For many things pertaining to our faith which
canonistarum mentio non habetur; nichil autem spectans are not mentioned in the science of the canonists are
ad regulam fidei in eorum scientia poterit reperiri nisi found explicitly in theology, but nothing pertaining to
quod a theologia recipiunt. Ergo ad theologos talis the rule of faith can be found in their science except
diffinitio principaliter noscitur pertinere, ad canonistas what they receive from theology. Therefore such a
autem non spectat nisi in quantum aliqua theologica decision is known to pertain chiefly to theologians; it
noscuntur a theologis mendicare.
does not pertain to canonists, however, except in so far
as they are known to borrow some theological matters
from theologians.
Tertia ratio est hec. De assertionibus quas scientia The third argument is this. The superior science has the
superior et inferior tractare noscuntur habet scientia power more chiefly to make a judgement about
superior principalius iudicare. Sed de quibusdam assertions which both a superior and an inferior science
assertionibus catholicis et hereticalibus theologia, que are known to investigate. But theology, which is the
est superior, et scientia canonistarum, que est inferior , superior, and the science of the canonists, which is the
aliquo modo pertractant. Ergo ad theologiam pertinet inferior, both investigate in some way certain catholic
principalius de assertionibus catholicis et hereticalibus and heretical assertions. It pertains more chiefly to
iudicare, et per consequens ad theologos principalius theology, therefore, to make a judgement about catholic
pertinet diffinire per modum doctrine que assertio and heretical assertions, and consequently it pertains
catholica, que heretica, est censenda.
more chiefly to theologians to decide by way of teaching
4

