Magister: Glossa illam expositionem non asserit, sed Master: The gloss does not assert this explanation but
tantummodo recitat, quam in fine illius notule reprobare merely recites it, and appears to reject it at the end of the
videtur dicens: "sed istis, scilicet asserentibus commentary when it says: "but they", namely those who
expositionem predictam, obviat infra, eodem capitulo assert the aforementioned explanation, "are contradicted
ultimo". Ex quo capitulo colligitur evidenter quod turba below, in the last chapter [c. Non inferenda col. 898] of
Iudeorum que non defendit Christum contra principes the same question". One obviously gathers from the last
ipsum occidere volentes nequaquam fuit immunis a chapter just referred to that the Jewish crowd, which did
scelere. Ex quo sequitur quod non solum prelati sed not defend Christ against the leaders who wanted to kill
etiam plebei tenebantur defendere Christum contra him, was not exempted from the crime. From which it
prelatos eorum, et ita socius tenetur etiam defendere follows that not only the prelates but also the ordinary
socium. Quod etiam illa expositio corrumpat textum people were obligated to defend Christ against their
patet aperte, cum loquitur expresse de illo qui a socio leaders, and thus a partner is likewise obligated to defend
iniuriam non repellit.
a partner. It is also quite clear that this explanation
misinterprets the text, which speaks expressly of
someone who fails to protect a partner from harm.
Discipulus: Ad idem plures auctoritates adducas.
Student: Present further authorities to the same effect.
Magister: Hoc idem Ambrosius, ut superius est Master: It has been indicated earlier [1 Dial. 6.37] that
adductum, asserit manifeste, quia dicit quod tueri "a Ambrose asserts the same point because he states [col.
latronibus socios, plena iustitia est". Opus autem iustitie 897] that "full of justice" is the protection "of one's
tenetur quilibet exercere. Ergo de necessitate iustitie partners from bandits". And everyone is obligated to
sunt socii defendendi.
perform a work of justice. Therefore justice necessarily
demonstrates that partners are to be defended.
Item, idem ut habetur dis. 86 c. Non satis loquens illi Again, the same Ambrose (this is recorded in dis. 86 c.
qui opera misericordie proximo tenetur impendere Non satis) speaking of someone who is obligated to
(qualis est non solum prelatus sed etiam subditus) ait: provide works of mercy to his neighbour (not only a
"si tempore periculi, quo rapitur ad mortem, plus apud characteristic of rulers but also of subjects), states: "at a
te pecunia tua valeat quam vita morituri, non est leve time of danger, when someone is violently dragged off to
peccatum". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod debet quis death, it is no light transgression if money weighs more
socium a morte redimere, et per consequens eadem with you than the life of the one about to die". [col. 301]
ratione tenetur eum si potest defendere.
These words lead to the conclusion that a partner must
be rescued from death and thus, for the same reason,
must be defended if this is possible.
Item, ista videtur esse sententia Salomonis qui in Again, according to blessed Jerome in his prologue,
Proverbiis (secundum beatum Hieronymum in Prologo) [Hieronymus, Prologus in Bibliam, in Biblia Latina cum
parvulum docens, et per consequens non ad prelatum Glossa Ordinaria (facsimile reprint of the A. Risch
sed ad alium sermonem dirigens, ait: "erue eos qui /1480/1 Strassburg editio princeps), Brepols-Turnhout,
ducuntur ad mortem, et qui trahuntur ad interitum 1992, vol. II, p. 653b] this appears to be the judgement
liberare ne cesses". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod non of Solomon in the Proverbs who, teaching a youngster,
solum prelati sed etiam alii persecutiones et iniurias and therefore directing his speech not to a ruler but to
patientes defensare tenentur.
someone other than a ruler, states: "forbear to deliver
them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready
to be slain". [Proverbs 24:11] One gathers from these
words that not only prelates but also others are obligated
to defend those who suffer injuries and persecutions.
Discipulus: Sufficiant ad presens auctoritates iste pro Student: For the moment the authorities advanced in
assertione predicta. Ideo rationes adducas.
support of the assertion being discussed should be
sufficient. Therefore proceed to a presentation of the
supporting reasons.
Magister: Prima ratio est talis. Qui debent sibi mutuum Master: The first reason is this. Those who owe each
auxilium, consilium et favorem impendere, et sibi other the provision of mutual assistance, counsel, and
mutuam defensionem tenentur. Omnes autem catholici benefit, also owe each other mutual defense. But all
debent sibi mutuum auxilium consilium et favorem catholics owe to each other the provision of mutual
impendere. Tum quia omnes catholici sunt membra assistance, counsel, and benefit, because all catholics are
unius corporis, membra autem pro se invicem sollicita members of one body, and members are mutually
sunt (1 Cor. 12). Tum quia episcopi quorum unus non concerned for each other (1 Corinthians 12). [1
est prelatus alterius auxilium mutuum sibi debent Corinthians 12:25] This also holds because bishops of
impendere, teste Innocentio secundo qui, ut dicitur dis. which one is not the ruler of the other must provide
90 c. Precipimus, ait: "precipimus, ut episcopi, ad solum mutual assistance to each other, witness Innocent II who
Deum et salutem populi habentes respectum, omni states, as recorded in dis. 90 c. Precipimus: "we
339

