not possess them or do not study them, and for this reason he wished to publish that assertion as Catholic, as
being unknown to others. But by these words he clearly suggests how he came to fall into so many heresies. For
because he presumed to study the original writings of the saints and the divine scriptures without a teacher and
without academic training, and without first acquiring the other sciences that are known to minister to sacred
theology, not understanding rightly, from authorities badly understood, he has tried to infer very many heretical
assertions; and therefore he is "a teacher of error" who never was a disciple of truth, not taking notice of what
Jerome said to Paulinus [Letter 53]: "I have written the above briefly (for instruction by letter is not tolerated if it
wanders on too long), so that you may understand that you cannot make progress in the sacred scriptures unless
someone first shows you the way"---and no wonder, since according to Jerome in the same place, "Those who
make various furniture or cheap objects cannot do what they desire to do without a teacher". Being, therefore, at
first ignorant and less skilled, how can he, beginning in his old age to study the original writings of the saints,
understand them without a teacher, since hardly ever, or never, can a single man be found alive who learns
metaphysics without a teacher? Indeed he seems to be the "silly old man" whom blessed Jerome sharply rebukes
among others who rashly presume to teach the sacred scriptures before they have learnt them, saying, in the
same place, "Skill in the scriptures is the only art that everyone everywhere claims for himself... This the
talkative old woman, the silly old man, the wordy sophist---this they all take upon themselves, mangle, teach
before they learn".
When therefore he says, "After we were in that state, we particularly studied the original writings of the saints",
he shows how he came to teach as dogma so many heresies, namely because he studied the original writings of
the saints which he by no means understood, and yet he thinks he understands them, and therefore labours to
drag them, resisting, to his own heresies
And when he says, "And we have attended to the questions they raise in this material": Since even if he had
studied the original writings of the saints from boyhood he would by no means have come to a true
understanding of many things contained in them, how much more an old man, who from boyhood was applying
himself to the commotions of the world, and after he was promoted to that state involved in infinite occupations,
will by no means attain true understanding of the deep and subtle truths inserted in the writings of the saints.
"And we have often mentioned them in sermons", erroneously twisting the words of the saints. "And this was
very useful": Rather, it was pernicious and harmful, because by his sermons he led many ambitious men to deny
the truth of known faith and to prove hold, teach and defend heretical wickedness, and sowed dissensions, envies
and schisms among Christians. "Because others either did not possess their original writings or did not trouble to
study them. For there are students and others attached to certain writings who regard them as Gospels and
epistles, and seek little further": Some think that this is true of many who are teachers before they are disciples,
but that determination [John's dogmatic teaching] is by no means excused by the unskilfulness and ignorance of
others. "And therefore, because we have studied those matters in the original writings, we have made them
known, we have investigated them": He has studied the original writings badly, and therefore has proposed and
defended many heretical points.
[End of corrected text. The rest is for the time being translated from the Goldast text.]
CHAPTER 10
It continues:
However, it was never my intention to say anything against the faith, and if we have said any [such] thing, we
revoke the whole from that time.
Here is placed the fictitious and frivolous protestation or retraction or revocation of the inventor of the oft
mentioned heresy. Concerning this part three things must be done.
[Theses]
first it must be proved that the foregoing words do not excuse him so that he was not and is not still a heretic.
Second it must be shown that the asserter of the before mentioned heresy, though he could be converted to
Catholic truth, nevertheless could in no way be excused so that he is not a heretic.
Third it must be said what sort of a revocation he ought to make if he wishes to be reputed among Catholics, that
is, which would declare that he is not a heretic (though he will not be able by any revocation to declare that he
has not been a heretic).
[Notable points]
[1] To make these things clear certain points must be noted, of which the first is that is there are two kinds of
things to be believed. For some things must be believed explicitly, and some must be believed implicitly. This is
quite clear, because no Christian ought to be ignorant of the whole of the Christian faith; therefore it is not
enough for him to believe only that the Christian faith is true, but he must believe explicitly something that
belongs to the Christian faith, and thus every Catholic is bound to believe something explicitly. Augustine
plainly suggests this, On John, as quoted De Consecratione, dist. 4, c. 1. He says: "The visible sacrament of
water is necessary to washing the visible body, just as the invisible teaching of the faith is necessary to the
sanctification of the invisible soul". We gather clearly from these words that each Christian ought to learn
something of the Christian faith, which he should believe explicitly.
528

