sanctorum patrum patenter ostendi videtur. Ait enim defend a partner when he can. The major is obvious. The
Eleutherius papa, ut habetur 2 q. 7 c. Negligere: minor premiss appears clearly demonstrated by
"negligere, cum possis perversos perturbare, nichil aliud authorities of the holy fathers. For Pope Eleutherius, as
est quam fovere. Nec caret scrupulo societatis occulte is recorded in 2 q. 7 c. Negligere, says: "to neglect to
qui manifesto facinori desinit obviare". Eadem sententia confound the wicked when you can do this is nothing
etiam verbaliter ponitur dis. 83 c. Error, et 23 q. 3 c. else than to give them support. Suspicion of involvement
Qui potest ponitur sub hiis verbis: "qui potest obviare et in secret conspiracy is not out of place where someone
perturbare perversos, et non facit, nichil est aliud quam who can, fails to act against an obvious crime". [col.
favere impietati eorum. Nec caret scrupulo societatis 501] The same judgement, verbally identical, is recorded
occulte qui manifesto facinori desinit obviare". Ex in dis. 83 c. Error, [col. 293] and in 23 q. 3 c. Qui potest
quibus verbis colligitur quod qui non resistit iniuriam we have it in the following words: "he who can resist
facienti eidem communicat in crimine atque favet.
and confound the wicked, and fails to do this, does
nothing else than to give support to their impiety.
Suspicion of involvement in secret conspiracy is not out
of place where someone who can fails to act against an
obvious crime". [col. 898] One gathers from these words
that he who does not resist someone who commits a
harmful misdeed is his accomplice in crime and his
supporter.
Discipulus: Verba que allegasti de prelatis tantummodo Student: The words that you have presented in argument
debent intelligi secundum quod notat glossa 2 q. 7 must only be understood as applying to rulers according
Negligere.
to the note of the gloss to 2 q. 7 Negligere.
Magister: Hec tua responsio dupliciter impugnatur. Master: This response of yours is rejected in two ways.
Primo quia glossa hoc non asserit sed tantummodo dicit First of all because the gloss does not assert as much, but
quod ista "videtur de prelatis tantum loqui". Secundo merely states that this source "appears only to speak of
quia perturbare perversos contingit dupliciter. Uno prelates". [col. 709] Secondly, because there are two
modo ipsos pro sua perversitate pena congrua puniendo, ways of confounding the wicked. One way is to punish
et sic perturbare perversos regulariter solummodo them for their wickedness by an appropriate penalty, and
pertinet ad iudices vel prelatos. Alio modo saltem eis to confound the wicked in this way pertains as a rule
cum expedit verbis monitoriis resistendo. Et istud only to judges or to prelates. Another way is to resist
spectat ad omnes, glossa ibidem aperte insinuante quod them by verbal warnings, at least when this is expedient.
quilibet tenetur perturbare "id est prohibere et removere And this is a method available to all, with the contextual
a malo, et hoc cum commode potest illud facere, alias gloss openly insinuating that everyone is obligated to
non peccat qui sic non prohibet", et subdit: "secundum confound "that is, to forbid the doing of evil and to
hoc quilibet tenetur prohibere iniuriam a proximo," et dissuade people from it, and to do so when one
per consequens proximum saltem verbis si potest debet conveniently may, otherwise there is no sin in a failure
defendere, licet non sit prelatus ipsius.
to prohibit in this way", [col. 709] and the gloss adds:
"according to this, everyone is obligated to prevent the
doing of harm to a neighbour", [col. 709] and
consequently he must defend the neighbour at least
verbally, if this is possible, even though he is not the
neighbour's prelate.
Quarta ratio est hec. Ille tenetur, si potest, defendere Here is the fourth reason. He is obligated to defend (if he
socium iniuriam patientem, qui tenetur corripere et can) a partner suffering harm, who is bound to rebuke
corrigere iniuriam inferentem, nam corrigendo iniuriari and correct the individual inflicting the harm, for in
volentem defendit quantum in se est ipsum qui esset correcting the one wanting to do harm he is defending as
passurus iniuriam. Sed alii quam iudices vel prelati, si much as he can the person who would have experienced
possunt, tenentur corrigere iniuriari volentem. Ergo si the harm. But people other than judges or prelates are
commode possunt, debent defendere illum qui est obligated to correct (if they can) an individual wanting to
passurus iniuriam. Maior evidens esse videtur. Minor inflict harm. Therefore, if they conveniently can, they
multipliciter videtur posse probari. Primo auctoritate must defend the person who would be experiencing the
beati Augustini qui in libro 'De verbis Domini' (et harm. The major premiss appears evident. The minor
ponitur 23 q. 4 c. primo) ait: "tollerandi sunt quidem premiss appears capable of being proved in many ways.
mali pro pace, nec corporaliter ab eis recedatur sed First, by the authority of blessed Augustine who states in
spiritualiter. Spiritualiter autem exire est facere quod the book 'On the words of the Lord' (as recorded in 23 q.
pertinet ad correctionem malorum, quantum licet pro 4 c. 1): "the bad must certainly be tolerated for the sake
gradu cuiusque, salva pace". Ubi dicit glossa super of peace, and withdrawal from their company must be
verbo 'pro gradu': "id est pro dignitate, et officio spiritual, not physical. Spiritual withdrawal consists in
cuiuscunque. Aliter enim debent prelati corrigere doing what is relevant for the correction of bad people,
341

