iudicari iudicio". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod judge the whole church, while being called to the
de summo pontifice non licet toti ecclesie iudicare sed judgment of no one, nor was its own judgment ever to be
ipse habet de tota ecclesia iudicare. Cum ergo nec subject to judicial review". From these words we
persona nec aliqua congregatio in terris sit superior tota understand that the whole church is not allowed to judge
ecclesia, nec papa qui est supra totam ecclesiam potest the pope, but it is his function to judge the whole church.
aliqua congregatio vel persona superior reperiri. Sexta Therefore since neither a person nor some congregation
auctoritas est Nicholai pape qui, ut habetur causa et on earth is superior to the entire church, it is impossible
questione predictis c. Patet, ait: "patet profecto sedis to find a person or some congregation which is superior
apostolice cuius auctoritate maius non est iudicium a to the pope, who is himself above the entire church. The
nemine fore retractandum, neque cuiquam de eius liceat sixth authority is that of Pope Nicholas (we have it in the
iudicio iudicare". Ex quibus habetur quod nemini licet same context at c. Patet) [col. 609] who states: "It is
de summo pontifice iudicare et per consequens non unquestionably clear that the judgment of the Apostolic
habet superiorem in terris.
see (there is no greater authority) is to be reviewed by no
one, nor is anyone allowed to judge its decision". From
this we gather that no one has the right to judge the
supreme pontiff, and consequently that he has no
superior on earth.
Discipulus: Puto quod qui posset ad istas auctoritates Student: I think that one who could reasonably respond
rationabiliter respondere omnes alias eandem to these authorities would be able, without difficulty, to
sententiam pretendentes sine difficultate dissolveret. solve all the others claiming the same point. Therefore
Ideo ista sufficiant. Signa tamen ubi poterunt alie these are sufficient. Indicate however where additional
inveniri que sonare videntur quod papa non habet authorities might be found which appear to suggest that
iudicem superiorem in terris.
the pope has no superior judge on earth.
Magister: Ad hoc poterit allegari auctoritas Nicholai Master: The authority of Pope Nicholas in di. 21 c.
pape di. 21 c. Nunc autem, et di. 22 c. Qua traditione et Nunc autem [col. 71], and di. 22 c. Qua traditione [col.
2 q. 7 Petrus.
75], and 2 q. 7 Petrus [col. 496], might be adduced to
this end.
Discipulus: Pro eadem assertione rationes adducas.
Student: Provide arguments in favour of the same
assertion.
Magister: Prima ratio talis est. Ille a quo non licet Master: The first argument is this. He from whom it is
appellare non habet superiorem in terries, quia ab omni not permitted to appeal does not have a superior on
inferiori ad superiorem licite est appellare (2 q. 7 earth, because one is allowed to appeal from any inferior
Placuit). Sed a papa appellare non licet (9 q. 3 c. Ipsi et to a superior (2 q. 7 c. Placuit)[col. 501]. But it is not
c. Cuncta), ergo papa non habet iudicem superiorem in permitted to appeal from the pope (9 q. 3 c. Ipsi [col.
terris. Secunda ratio talis est. Ille qui est omnibus 611]and c. Cuncta [col. 611]). Therefore the pope has no
superior non habet superiorem quia non potest respectu superior judge on earth. The second argument is this. He
eiusdem vel eorumdem esse superior et inferior. Sed who is superior to everyone does not have a superior,
papa est omnibus catholicis superior cum sit omnium because one cannot be both superior and inferior with
caput, igitur non habet iudicem superiorem in terris. respect to another. But the pope is superior to all
Tertia ratio talis est. Qui non potest ab aliquo accusari catholics since he is the head of all, therefore he does not
non habet iudicem superiorem. Sed papa non potest ab have a superior on earth. The third argument is this. He
aliquo accusari quia pastor ab ovibus accusari non who cannot be the subject of someone's accusation does
potest (6 q. 1 Oves et 2 q. 7 Petrus). Omnes autem not have a superior judge. But the pope cannot be
catholici sunt oves cure et regimini pape commisse. accused by someone, because the shepherd cannot be
Igitur ipsum accusare non possunt et per consequens a accused by the sheep (6 q. 1 Oves [col. 555] and 2 q. 7
nemine potest iudicari.
Petrus [col. 496]). Now all catholics are sheep entrusted
to the care and the rule of the pope. Hence they cannot
accuse him and consequently he may be judged by no
one.
Capitulum 2
Chapter 2
Discipulus: Noli multiplicare rationes pro hac parte, sed Student: Do not multiply arguments in favour of this
motiva dicentium quod papa habet superiorem in terris view, and propound the reasons of those who say that
enarra.
the pope has a superior on earth.
Magister: Quod papa etiam manens papa habeat Master: Some try to demonstrate that the pope has a
iudicem superiorem in terris nonnulli multis rationibus superior judge on earth even when he remains a pope,
probare nituntur. Modi tamen ponendi sunt diversi. and they adduce many arguments. But they have
Quidam enim dicunt quod imperator vel aliquis alius different ways of putting this. For some say that the
iudex et princeps secularis aut populus seu multitudo emperor or another judge and secular ruler, or the people
aliqua est iudex ordinarius pape. Alii vero dicunt quod or some multitude, is the normal judge of the pope.
269

