damnare debet eandem, nec per hoc quod non intelligit
valet aliqualiter excusari. Sic enim possent multi
haeretici excusari qui videre non possunt quomodo
haereses suae fidei obvient orthodoxae.

heretical it seems that the pope ought to condemn it,
and he can not be excused in any way by the fact that
he does not understand it. For in this way many
heretics could be excused who can not see how their
heresies are opposed to orthodox faith.

Magister Ad hoc alii respondent quod si papa
informationi catholicorum per Scripturam probantium
manifeste aliquam assertionem veritati obviare
catholicae pertinaci animositate, quia scilicet alicui
errori irrevocabiliter adhaereret, nollet acquiescere,
esset haereticus vel fautor haereticae pravitatis
iudicandus; sed si ex sola simplicitate, quia non esset
capax informationis qua ostenditur talem assertionem
esse haereticam, minime consentiret, non esset
reprehensibilis iudicandus nisi recusaret de veritate
informari.

Master Others reply to this that if the pope were to
refuse with pertinacious ill will to agree with the
instruction of catholics who clearly prove through
scripture that some assertion is opposed to catholic
truth, because, that is, he was clinging irrevocably to
some error, he should be judged a heretic or a
supporter of heretical wickedness; but if he were not
to agree out of simplicity alone, because he was not
capable of [understanding] the instruction by which it
is shown that the assertion is heretical, he should not
be judged reprehensible unless he were to refuse to be
instructed about the truth.

Discipulus Quis sit censendus haereticus postea
indagabo. Ideo alias rationes, si quas cogitasti, pro
principali proposito adducas?

Student I will investigate later who should be
considered a heretic. Would you therefore bring
forward other arguments for the main proposition if
you have thought of any?

Magister Sexta ratio pro praedicta sententia est haec.
Non minus debet intelligere sententiam suam seu
diffinitionem summus pontifex qua damnat haereticam
pravitatem quam debet iudex intelligere sententiam qua
damnat aliquem de crimine qualicunque; sed iudici
damnanti quemcumque de crimine non sufficit credere
consiliariis suis, sed debet videre et considerare per
seipsum quomodo sententia sua iustitiam et aequitatem
contineat. Ergo similiter papa in damnando haereticam
pravitatem non debet solummodo credere aliis, sed
etiam oportet eum intelligere quomodo damnanda
assertio repugnat catholicae veritati. Maior est
manifesta quia in maioribus causis maior est adhibenda
cautela. Minor probatur quia nisi iudex deberet
intelligere quam dictat sententiam non requireretur
sapientia in iudicante, sed sufficeret quod esset bonae
fidei sapientum acquiescens consiliis. Sed hoc est
contra illud Apostoli 1 ad Corinthios 6, "Non est inter
vos sapiens quisquam qui possit iudicare inter fratrem
et fratrem." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod nullus
nisi sapiens debet iudicare inter fratrem et fratrem. Et
ita qui iudicat debet habere saltem iudicandi peritiam
ut sententiam quam dictat intelligat. Aliter enim posset
simplex et fatuus quicunque esse iudex esse.

Master A sixth argument for the above opinion is
this. A highest pontiff should not understand any less
the sentence or definition by which he condemns
heretical wickedness than a judge should understand
the sentence by which he condemns someone for any
kind of crime; but it is not enough for a judge
condemning anyone of a crime to believe his
counsellors; rather he should see and contemplate for
himself how his opinion preserves justice and equity.
Similarly therefore, in condemning heretical
wickedness a pope should not only believe others, but
it is also necessary for him to understand how the
assertion to be condemned is opposed to catholic
truth. The major [premise] is obvious because greater
caution should be employed in greater causes. The
minor [premise] is proved, because if a judge were not
obliged to understand the sentence which he
pronounces, wisdom would not be required in one
judging, but it would be enough that he was of good
faith and agreed with the advice of those who are
wise. But this is against what the apostle says in 1
Cor. 6[:5], "Is it so that there is not among you any
one wise man, that is able to judge between his
brethren?" We are given to understand by these words
that only he who is wise should judge between one
brother and another. And so he who judges should
have at least the skill in judging such that he
understands the sentence which he pronounces. For
otherwise any simple and stupid person could be a
judge.

Septima ratio est haec. Qui potest contradicere
congregatis in concilio generali non tenetur

A seventh argument is this. He who can contradict
those gathered together at a general council is not

79

