from communion with pope Anastasius II, and it is
established that these clerks in no way submitted their
assertion to the correction of the pope.
Discipulus: Forte dicetur istis quod clerici illi non Student: It might perhaps be objected to these thinkers
submiserunt assertionem suam correctioni pape heretici that the clerks in question did not submit their assertion
qualis fuit Anastasius 2us, sed submiserunt correctioni to the correction of a heretic pope, which Anastasius II
futuri pontificis catholici.
was, but submitted it to the correction of a future
catholic pontiff.
Magister: Hoc reprobatur, quia Anastasium secundum Master: This explanation is rejected. These clerks
reputaverunt hereticum propter hoc, quod assertioni considered Anastasius II to be a heretic because he had
eorum quam acceperant a sanctis patribus contradixit. Et contradicted their assertion, which they had received
propter eandem rationem, quicunque futurus papa postea from the holy fathers. And for the same reason, they
contradixisset, eundem hereticum reputassent. Quare would have considered a heretic whichever future pope
nullius hominis correctioni volebant assertionem suam might have subsequently contradicted this. Therefore
submittere. Et ideo dicunt isti quod christianus they did not want to submit their assertion to the
assertionem catholicam correctioni pape non debet correction of any man. And that is why these thinkers
submittere, quod etiam ratione probare nituntur. Nam say that a Christian must not submit a catholic assertion
veritatem infallibilem et immutabilem non debet quis to the correction of the pope, a contention they also
correctioni illius submittere qui falli potest et errare. attempt to prove by reason. For someone must not
Veritates autem catholice sunt infallibiles et submit a truth which is infaillible and immutable to the
immutabiles, papa vero falli potest et errare, ergo tales correction of one who may err or be misled. But catholic
veritates nullus debet correctioni pape submittere. Unde truths are infaillible and immutable, while the pope may
minimam veritatem contentam in scriptura divina non err or be misled, therefore no one must submit such
debet quicunque submittere correctioni pape, quia certa, truths to the correction of the pope. Hence, one must not
sicut discussione non indigent, ita et correctione non submit to the correction of the pope even the least
egent. Quare, cum omnia asserta in scripturis divinis sint weighty of the truths contained in Divine Scripture,
certa, nulla correctione egent. Quare nullius correctione because matters which are certain, just as they do not
debent submitti. Cum vero dicitur quod beatus require discussion, so likewise do they not require
Hieronymus fidem suam quam didicerat in ecclesia correction. Therefore since all the matters asserted in the
supposuit correctioni beatissimi pape, respondetur quod Divine Scriptures are certain, they require no correction
hoc simpliciter est falsum, quod tamen ex verbis beati at all. Therefore they must not be submitted to anyone's
Hieronymi male intellectis elicitur. Unde, ut mentem correction. When it is claimed, however, that blessed
beati Hieronymi cunctis aperiant, verba ponunt eiusdem, Jerome submitted his faith, which he had learned in the
qui, ut habetur 24 q. 1 cap. Hec est fides, ait: "hec est church, to the correction of the most holy pope, the
fides, papa beatissime, quam in catholica ecclesia answer is that this is plainly false, and that the claim is
didicimus, quamque semper tenuimus; in qua si minus derived from badly understood words of blessed
perite aut parum caute forte aliquid positum est, Jerome. Hence, in order to explain the intention of
emendari cupimus a te, qui Petri et sedem tenes et blessed Jerome to everyone, the thinkers we are
fidem. Si autem hec nostra confessio apostolatus tui reporting cite his words. Blessed Jerome (we find this in
iudicio comprobatur, quicunque me culpare voluerit, se 24 q. 1 c. Hec est fides) states: "this is the faith, most
imperitum, vel malivolum, vel etiam non catholicum, holy pope, which we have learned in the catholic
sed hereticum comprobabit". Ex quibus verbis church, and which we have always held; should we have
concludunt quidam quod beatus Hieronymus fidem affirmed something in our presentation thereof which is
suam, quam in ecclesia didicerat, supposuit correctioni unlearned or perhaps lacking in caution, we desire to be
beatissimi pape. Sed dicunt alii quod isti verba beati corrected by you, who hold both Peter's see and his
Hieronymi minus bene intelligunt. Non enim intendit faith. But if this confession of ours is approved by the
Hieronymus fidem suam quam didicerat in ecclesia judgement of your apostolicity, then whoever would
correctioni beatissimi pape supponere, quia si papa illi want to fault me will prove himself unlearned, or
fidei contradixisset, beatus Hieronymus ipsum malicious, or even not a catholic but a heretic". [col.
hereticum reputasset. Didicit enim Hieronymus in 970] Some deduce from these words that blessed
ecclesia quod Christus fuit verus Deus et verus homo, Jerome submitted his faith, which he had learned in the
cui si papa obviasset, pro heretico pessimo eum church, to the correction of the most holy pope. But
Hieronymus habuisset.
others reply that such interpreters misunderstand blessed
Jerome's words. Indeed, Jerome did not intend to submit
to the correction of the most holy pope his faith which
he had learned in the church, for had the pope
contradicted this faith, blessed Jerome would have
considered him a heretic. For Jerome had learned in the
church that Christ was true God and true man. Had the
484

