apostate from the Christian faith. Therefore it is
permitted to appeal from him if he functions as a judge
in a case of faith.
Quinto sic. Omnis causa vitiata est per appellationis Here is the fifth reason. Every impaired case must be
remedium sublevanda, teste Fabiano papa qui, ut assisted through the remedy of an appeal, witness Pope
habetur 2 q. 6 c. 1, ait: "liceat appellatori vitiatam Fabian who states (we have this in 2 q. 6 c. 1): "let it be
causam appellationis remedio sublevare", et c. Liceat permitted for an appellant to assist an impaired case
ait: "liceat etiam in criminalibus causis appellare nec through the remedy of an appeal", and in c. Liceat [col.
vox appellandi denegetur ei, quem in supplicio sententia 472] he states: "let it be permitted to appeal even in
destinaverit". Sed papa diffinitive pronuntians pro reo criminal cases; nor may one deny the utterance of an
legem christianam esse falsam, causa fidei est appeal to someone whom a sentence would have
apertissime vitiata, ergo licet actori a tali iniqua destined for punishment". But when a pope pronounces
sententia lata contra fidem catholicam appellare.
definitively in favour of a defendant that the Christian
law is false, the cause of faith is most evidently harmed.
Therefore the plaintiff is allowed to appeal from such an
unjust sentence rendered against the catholic faith.
Discipulus: Per istam rationem liceret a papa pro Student: On the basis of this reason, if every impaired
quacunque iniqua sententia in aliis causis quam in causa case could be assisted by the remedy of an appeal, it
fidei appellare, si omnis causa vitiata per appellationis would be permitted to appeal from the pope with respect
remedium poterit sublevari.
to any unjust sentence whatever, in cases other than a
case of faith.
Magister: Respondetur quod omnis causa vitiata per Master: The answer is that the remedy of an appeal may
appellationis remedium poterit sublevari quando ferens assist every impaired case when the one rendering an
iniquam sententiam habet iudicem superiorem. Papa unjust sentence has a superior judge. A heretic pope
autem hereticus habet iudicem superiorem ergo etc.
surely has a superior judge, therefore etc.
Discipulus: Video quod hec ratio fundatur in aliis Student: I notice that this reason derives from other
rationibus, unde alias rationes adducas.
arguments. Proceed with the presentation of further
reasons.
Magister: Sexta ratio talis est. Ab illo est licitum pro Master: Here is the sixth reason. One is allowed to
causa heresis appellare qui potest de heresi accusari, sed appeal for cause of heresy from someone who can be
papa potest de heresi accusari, ergo licet a papa pro accused of heresy. But the pope may be accused of
heresi appellare.
heresy, therefore it is permitted to appeal from the pope
for cause of heresy.
Discipulus: Ista ratio equaliter probat quod a papa licet Student: This reason equally proves that it is permitted
pro omni heresi appellare et non solum in casu predicto. to appeal from the pope for every heresy, and not only in
the specific case we are reviewing.
Magister: Omnes rationes allegate et allegande Master: All the reasons so far argued, and those that
secundum rei veritatem concludunt quod a papa heretico will be argued, conclude in truth that it is permitted to
licet appellare qualicunque heresi fuerit maculatus, unde appeal from a heretic pope no matter what heresy
ille casus non est positus nisi ut rationes patentiores et besmirches him. Hence the case we are focusing on is
probabiliores videantur.
only suggested so that the reason proving the general
point might appear both more obvious and probable.
Discipulus: Alias rationes adducas.
Student: Present another reason.
Magister: Septima ratio est talis. Ab illo licet appellare Master: The seventh reason is this. One is allowed to
a cuius obedientia et communione licet recedere. Sed a appeal from him from whose obedience and communion
communione et obedientia pape heretici pronuntiantis it is permitted to withdraw. But it is permitted to
legem christianam esse falsam licet recedere, exemplo withdraw from the communion and obedience of a
illorum romanorum qui pro minori excessu, quia pro heretic pope who proclaims the Christian law to be false,
fautoria hereticorum dampnatorum, a communione et following the example of those Romans who laudably
obedientia Anastasii secundi laudabiliter se abegerunt, removed themselves from the communion and obedience
ut habetur dis. 19 Anastasius. Ergo a papa pronuntiante of Anastasius II, and for a lesser misdeed than what we
diffinitive legem christianam esse falsam licet appellare. are discussing, namely for his support of condemned
Octavo sic. Ab illa sententia licet appellare quam licet heretics (the account is in dis. 19 Anastasius) [col. 64].
publice impugnare, quia appellare videtur esse quidam Therefore it is permitted to appeal from a pope
modus specialis impugnandi iniquam sententiam. Sed definitively proclaiming that the Christian law is false.
sententiam pape pronuntiantis fidem christianam esse Here is the eighth reason. It is permitted to appeal from a
falsam et Christum falsum fuisse prophetam licet illi judgement which one may publicly oppose, because the
contra quem lata est sententia sicut et omnibus act of appealing appears to be one specific method of
304

