error. Blessed John seems to attest to this in various
places in Revelations.
Hec sunt inter alia que assercionem prefatam de
improbabilitate convincunt aperte, et licet de
conclusione non dubitem, tamen quomodo potest ad ista
responderi, ut clarius veritatem intelligam ac de multis
que ad istam spectant materiam occasionem habeam
cogitandi, pandere velis.

These are [some texts] among others which plainly
convict that aforesaid assertion of improbability, and
although I do not doubt the conclusion would you
nevertheless make known how those [texts] can be
replied to, so that I might understand the truth more
clearly and have the opportunity of thinking about
many things that pertain to that matter.

Capitulum 34

Chapter 34

Magister Vis ut tibi quid senciam de predictis aperiam?

Master: Do you want me to reveal what I think about
the foregoing?

Discipulus Nolo ut quid tenes in mente reveles, sed
responsiones aliquas que cogitari et teneri poterunt a
quocumque non differas recitare?

Student: I do not want you to disclose what you
think in your own mind, but would you not hesitate
to recite some replies that could be thought of and
maintained by someone?

Magister Hoc pacto, ut omnia que narrabo non aliter
accipiantur nisi quod aliquis questionum difficilium
indagator potest dicenda putare consona veritati,
quomodo ad predictas instancias respondere contingat
ostendam.

Master: If we agree that everything I say will be
taken only as what some investigator of difficult
questions can consider should be said as harmonious
with the truth, I will show how it is possible to reply
to the above examples.

Discipulus Hoc pactum feci tecum pro toto opere isto,
quod volo servare, et ut tu serves exoro.

[See Significant Variants, para. 41.]Student: I have
made this agreement with you for the whole work
and want to keep it, and I ask you to keep it.

Magister Volo eciam quod dicenda fratri M. et eius
sequacibus nequaquam imponas. Sicut enim in
precedentibus multas recitavi sentencias que
assercionibus domini Iohannis et suorum sequacium
obviant manifeste, quas tamen frater M. et sui sequaces
minime opinantur, ymmo nonnullas impugnare nituntur,
ita in parte futura operis huius, nisi tu nolueris, plura
referam que predicti frater M. et sui sequaces satagunt
improbare.

Master: I also want you not to attribute the things to
be said to brother M[ichael] and his followers. For
just as I have recorded many opinions in what has
been said above that openly conflict with assertions
of the lord John and his followers, which
nevertheless brother M[ichael] and his followers do
not maintain, some of which indeed they try to
attack, so in the future part of this work I will discuss
many things, unless you do not want me to, which
brother M[ichael] and his followers try to disprove.

Discipulus Quod istum modum teneas a principio
affectavi, quia sentencias contrarias quorumcumque
catholicorum, et etiam interdum illas que a nullo
Christiano tenentur, licet possint habere catholicos vel
hereticos defensores, te desidero recitare. Sic enim
multiplicius et efficacius exercitabimus ingenia
studiosorum.

Student: I have wanted you to hold to this method
from the start because I want you to record the
opposing opinions of all catholics, and even
sometimes those [opinions] which are held by no
Christian although they can have catholic or heretical
defenders. For in this way we will exercise more
variously and more effectively the wit of the
studious.

Magister Pactis suppositis memoratis, quomodo ad
instancias allegatas poterit responderi tue curiositati
satagam explanare. Ad primam itaque dupliciter potest
dici. Primo quod verba Christi prefata, "Erit tunc
tribulacio magna," etc., ad litteram intellecta, de

Master: With that agreement in place I will try to
explain for your curiosity how it is possible to reply
to the objections brought forward. And so two things
can be said to the first [objection]. The first is that
Christ's words, For there shall be then great

261

