allegatum. Ergo imperator est iudex ordinarius summi argued in a prior context)[1 Dial. 5.18] Therefore the
pontificis. Quarta ratio talis est. Imperator fuit iudex emperor is the normal judge of the pope. The fourth
ordinarius beati Petri, ergo est iudex ordinarius pape. argument is this. The emperor was the normal judge of
Consequentia est evidens quia papa non est magis blessed Peter, therefore he is the normal judge of the
exemptus quam fuit beatus Petrus. Antecedens probatur pope. The consequence is obvious, because the pope
quia omnes apostoli quantum ad hoc quod essent does not enjoy a greater exemption than did blessed
subiecti vel non subiecti iurisdictioni imperatoris Peter. The proof of the antecedent is that all the apostles
fuerunt pares, sed beatus Paulus fuit subiectus were equal on the issue of their subjection or lack of
iurisdictioni imperatoris quia ad Cesarem tanquam ad subjection to the emperor's jurisdiction. Since blessed
superiorem appellavit, ergo beatus Petrus fuit subiectus Paul was subject to the jurisdiction of the emperor (he
eidem.
did appeal to Caesar as to a superior)[Acts 25:11], it
follows that blessed Peter was [also] subject to it.
Discipulus: Dicetur istis quod Paulus appellavit non Student: One can say to them that Paul appealed not
quia erat subiectus iurisdictioni imperatoris sed quia because he was subject to the jurisdiction of the emperor
volebat caute insidias Iudeorum evadere.
but because he wished to circumspectly evade the snares
of the Jews.
Magister: Hoc impugnatur sic. Secundum beatum Master: Here is how one attacks this last point.
Ambrosium ut habetur 22 q. ultima c. Cavete "non According to blessed Ambrose (we have it in 22 q. 5 c.
solum in falsis verbis sed etiam in simulatis operibus Cavete)[col. 888] "the lie resides not only in false words
mendacium est", ubi notat glossa quod "factis mentitur but also in pretended actions", where the gloss notes that
sicut verbis". Beatus Paulus igitur si non erat vere "one lies by deeds as well as by words"[s.v.operibus
subiectus imperatori facto mentiebatur cum simulaverit col.1282]. Therefore if blessed Paul was not in truth
se subiectum iudicio Cesaris appellando. Tale autem subject to the emperor, he was lying in deed when he
crimen est beato Paulo minime imponendum. Ergo pretended to be a subject appealing to the judgment of
beatus Paulus vere fuit imperatori subiectus. Hanc etiam Caesar. But such a crime is hardly to be ascribed to
conclusionem per exemplum ostendunt. Nam sicut blessed Paul. Therefore blessed Paul was truly subject to
legitur in cronicis Iohannes 12 "erat venator et totus the emperor. They also demonstrate the same conclusion
lubricus, adeo quod etiam publice feminas tenebat. by an example. For as we read in the Chronicles: "John
Propter quod quidam cardinalium et Romanorum XII was an utterly lascivious womanizer to the point of
scripserunt occulte Ottoni principi Saxonum ut scandalo public involvements with them. Because of that some
ecclesie compatiens sine mora Romam properaret. Hoc cardinals and Romans secretly wrote to Otto prince of
papa percipiens Iohanni diacono cardinali tamquam the Saxons that he should hurry to Rome without delay
huius facti consiliario nasum et alteri Iohanni out of commiseration for the scandal of the church.
subdiacono qui literas scripserat manum amputari fecit. When the pope learned of this, he ordered the
Hic cum frequenter per imperatorem et clerum de sua amputation of cardinal deacon John's nose (as he had
correctione fuisset monitus, non correctus, presente counseled this recourse to Otto) and the amputation of
imperatore de papatu destitutus, communi voto Leo another John's hand (this one was a subdeacon who had
papa eligitur". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod written the letter). The pope did not correct himself
imperator est iudex ordinarius pape. Aliter enim although he had been frequently warned about his
imperator predictum papam nullatenus deposuisset.
correction by emperor and clergy. He was deprived of
the papacy in the presence of the emperor, and by a
common vote Pope Leo is (sic) elected".[MGH SS XXII,
Martini Chronicon, 431] One gathers from these words
that the emperor is the normal judge of the pope. Indeed
the emperor would otherwise never have deposed the
aforementioned pope.
Discipulus: Dicerent aliqui quod imperator iniuste Student: Some might say that the emperor acted
processit nec dictus papa fuit vere depositus sed de facto unjustly and that the said pope was not truly deposed,
fuit papatu tantummodo spoliatus.
but merely stripped of the papacy as a matter of fact.
Magister: Hec responsio impugnatur, quia si papa Master: This response is challenged, for if Pope John
Iohannes remansisset verus papa ille qui sibi successit would had remained a true pope, the one who succeeded
ipso vivente non fuisset verus papa sed papatus invasor, him in his lifetime would not have been a true pope but a
ex quo sequitur quod omnia que egit nullius fuissent usurper of the papacy, from which it follows that
roboris vel momenti sed debebant omnia in irritum everything which he did would have lacked firmness or
revocari, quod tamen minime fuit factum. Imo quod significance, and everything would have required
successor ipsius Iohannis ipso vivente fuit verus papa annulment. But this was not done. To the contrary: the
tota tenet ecclesia. Ergo papa Iohannes 12 vere fuit entire church holds that the person who succeeded John
depositus.
in the latter's lifetime was a true pope. Therefore Pope
John XII was truly deposed.
277

