Capitulum 9
Chapter 9
Discipulus: Adhuc tu trahis me ad materiam quam Student: Again you are pulling me towards material
nollem hic tractari et ideo quomodo ad auctoritates et which I would be unwilling to have reviewed in the
rationes inductas respondetur narra succincte.
present context. Give therefore a succinct narration of
the manner in which these opponents respond to the
authorities and arguments which have been advanced.
Magister: Ad primam auctoritatem Gregorii Nazianzeni Master: The answer to the first authority (that of
respondetur quod per tribunal et principatum prelatorum Gregory of Naziance) is: that by the tribunal and
intelligit potestatem quam in foro conscientie super rulership of prelates he means the power which they are
penitentes noscuntur habere. Ista vero potestas quia known to possess over penitents in the forum of
spiritualis est et ordinatur ad vitam eternam conscience. Indeed this power, because it is spiritual and
consequendam multo perfectior est omni iurisdictione ordained for the purpose of acquiring life eternal, is
temporali coactiva regum et principum que principaliter much more perfect than any coercive temporal
instituta est ad temporalia disponenda. Ad auctoritatem jurisdiction of kings and princes which was primarily
Felicis pape respondetur quod regia voluntas in fide instituted for the administration of wordly affairs. The
catholica addiscenda et sacramentis ecclesiasticis answer to the authority of Pope Felix is: that the royal
suscipiendis debet sacerdotibus esse subiecta si will should be subject to priests in the matter of learning
sacerdotes fidem retinent orthodoxam nichil contra the catholic faith and receiving ecclesiastical sacraments,
iustitiam imperantes. Si vero a catholica deviaverint if the priests maintain orthodox faith and do not
veritate vel sibi quam de iure non habent usurpaverint command anything contrary to justice. But if priests
potestatem reges in huiusmodi nullatenus sunt subiecti. should deviate from catholic truth or usurp for
Verba ergo Felicis pape sane intelligenda sunt et non themselves a power which they legally do not possess, in
sunt ex ambitione clericorum cupientium in populis et this kings are in no way subjects. Therefore the words of
in clero contra doctrinam beati Petri apostoli dominari Pope Felix must be understood sensibly, and are not to
in preiudicium regum et principum exponenda. be expounded by reference to the ambition of clerks who
Consimiliter respondetur ad c. Duo sunt et ad c. Si wish to dominate over peoples and clergy contrary to the
imperator. Nam dicunt isti papam a concilio generali et doctrine of the blessed apostle Peter [1 Peter 5:2-3] and
universali ecclesia aliquam potestatem habere super with prejudice to kings and princes. A similar answer is
principes ultra illam quam habet a Christo et in quantum given to c. Duo sunt and c. Si imperator. For these
est successor beati Petri.
opponents say that the pope possesses from the general
council and the universal church a certain authority over
rulers which goes beyond the one he has received from
Christ and in his capacity as the successor of blessed
Peter.
Ad primam vero rationem inductam ad probandum quod Now as to the initial argument advanced to prove that
imperator est inferior papa respondetur primo quod the emperor is inferior to the pope, the answer is, first of
maior non est universaliter vera sed capit instantiam all, that the major is not universally true but becomes
quando aliquis sponte iurat alii fidelitatem. Talis enim relevant when someone spontaneously swears fealty to
ante iuramentum non est semper inferior illo cui iurat another, for prior to the oath he is not always inferior to
quamvis per iuramentum quodammodo seipsum the one to whom he swears it, though by the oath he
inferiorem illo efficiat. Ad minorem vero dicitur does in some sense make himself inferior to this other.
dupliciter. Uno modo quod imperator nunquam iuravit While the minor of the argument is addressed in two
fidelitatem pape nisi spontanea voluntate et ideo suis ways. One approach is that the emperor never swore
successoribus legem consimilem per tale iuramentum fealty to the pope save by his own spontaneous will, and
nequaquam imposuit. Aliter respondetur quod ex therefore by such an oath he did not at all impose upon
ordinatione Romanorum a quibus imperator suam his successor a similar legal obligation. Another
habuit iurisdictionem potuit imperator pape iurare et in response is that the emperor could have sworn fealty to
hoc tenuisset papa non vicem beati Petri nec in hoc fuit the pope by ordination of the Romans from whom the
vicarius Christi sed in hoc fuisset commissarius emperor had received his jurisdiction, and in this
Romanorum. Ad secundam similiter respondetur quod transaction the pope would not have represented blessed
papa non transtulit imperium a Grecis in Germanos in Peter nor been the vicar of Christ, but in this he would
quantum vicarius Christi et successor beati Petri quia have been the trustee of the Romans. A similar response
ratione vicariatus illius et successionis huiusmodi non is given to the second argument: that the pope did not
habet maiorem auctoritatem super imperium quam transfer the empire from the Greeks to the Romans in his
super regnum Francorum vel Anglorum. Sicut igitur in capacity as the vicar of Christ and the successor of
quantum vicarius Christi et successor beati Petri non blessed Peter; since by reason of this vicarship and of
potest transferre regnum Francorum de una domo ad the given succession the Pope did not possess greater
aliam, ita ratione vicariatus et successionis non potuit de authority over the empire than over the kingdom of the
gente in gentem transferre imperium Romanorum. Franks or that of the English. Therefore, just as he
283

