ideo pone exemplum apertum de appellatione a papa influenced by obvious examples, therefore provide an
catholico interiecta.
obvious example of the issuing of an appeal from a
catholic pope.
Magister: Sicut in principio istius materie tibi apertius Master: As I clearly indicated to you at the beginning of
indicavi tenentes istam assertionem quod appellationi a our discussion concerning this subject matter, [1 Dial.
papa catholico est deferendum antequam constet 6.18] those who hold the assertion that an appeal from a
appellationem non esse legitimam nolunt ad catholic pope must be deferred to before it becomes
strictissimam significationem 'appellationis' artari, sed manifest that the appeal is illegitimate, do not wish to be
utuntur nomine 'appellationis' quo poterunt largius, bound to the most precise meaning of "appeal", but use
scilicet pro provocatione largissime sumpta, imo etiam, the term "appeal" in as wide an acceptance as they can,
si usus permittit, pro recusatione. Intendunt igitur quod namely as referring to a challenge in the widest sense,
appellationi seu provocationi a papa catholico, vel etiam indeed one that includes a demurrer, if usage allows.
recusationi, quando allegatur causa que si esset probata Their intention is thus to maintain that when a cause is
deberet legitima reputari, tali appellationi vel recusationi argued which would be considered legitimate if proved,
est omnino deferendum.
one must entirely defer to such an appeal from or
demurrer against a catholic pope.
Tali modo loquendi supposito, ponatur quod aliquis On the basis of such terminology, let us assume that
appellat a papa vel recusat eum, allegando et se velle someone appeals from or demurs against a pope, arguing
probare firmiter offerendo quod papa tenuit et asseruit and firmly advancing an intention to prove that the pope
fidem christianam esse falsam et fictam, et ideo papa held and asserted the Christian faith to be false and a
non potest nec debet officium papatus exercere. Quo sham, concluding that this pope neither can nor must
posito, dicunt isti quod tali appellationi seu provocationi continue to exercise the papal office. On this assumption,
vel recusationi, quantumcunque causa allegata sit falsa, these theorists say that even if the case argued by the
quia tamen est talis que si esset probata deberet legitima appellant is false, nevertheless since it is a case which
reputari, antequam allegans eam fuerit de calumpnia would be considered legitimate if proved, the pope and
convictus vel in probatione defecerit, aut per aliam all other catholics (before the individual arguing the case
exceptionem legitimam vel alium modum congruum is convicted of slander or fails to prove his contention or
appareat repellendus, tam papa quam alii catholici appears worthy of rejection because of some other
debent tali appellationi vel recusationi deferre circa legitimate consideration or some other appropriate
talem appellantem vel recusantem, antequam eum process) must defer to this appeal, challenge, or
malitiose constiterit processisse nichil penitus demurrer with respect to the challenger or the one
innovando. Imo pro tempore illo a iurisdictione summi offering a demurrer, and must not proceed to any
pontificis est exemptus.
modification of the situation before it has been
established that the appellant acted with malice. Indeed
for the time being such an appellant is exempt from the
jurisdiction of the supreme pontiff.
Hoc exemplo posito, probatur quod modo predicto tam Having laid out this example, one proves that both the
summus pontifex quam alii tali appellationi vel supreme pontiff and others are obligated to defer in the
recusationi deferre tenentur, et primo sic. Secundum manner just stated to such an appeal or demurrer. The
leges favore religionis multa statuuntur contra rationem, first proof is this. According to the laws many privileges
quod sane intellectum consonum veritati dinoscitur, quia are enacted in favour of religion, which seem contrary to
religio christiana maiori favore dinoscitur esse digna reason, but are ultimately recognized as compatible with
quam quecunque causa privata. Ex quo concluditur truth when properly understood, because the Christian
quod verba iuris in favorem religionis amplianda sunt et religion is known to be worthy of greater favour than any
nullatenus restringenda, et per consequens omnia iura private cause. From this one concludes that the words of
canonica et civilia in favorem edita appellantis the law should be broadened in favour of religion and in
interpretanda sunt largissime quando appellans pro no way restricted, and consequently that all canon and
religione christiana et fide catholica se asserit appellare. civil laws enacted in favour of the appellant should be
Constat autem secundum iura canonica et civilia quod understood in the broadest sense when the appellant
appellationi illius qui pro re alia quam pro fide appellat, asserts that he is appealing in the interest of the Christian
si talem causam allegat que si esset probata deberet religion and the catholic faith. But according to canon
legitima reputari, iudex a quo appellat et alii deferre and civil laws it is established that the judge from whom
tenentur. Ergo per eadem iura probatur quod appellans a appeal is made, and others, are bound to defer to the
papa allegans quod papa tenet et asserit fidem appeal of one who appeals for a cause other than a cause
christianam esse falsam, papa et alii appellationi eius vel of faith, if he argues a case which if it were proved
recusationi deferre tenentur, quia si hec causa esset would be considered legitimate. Therefore by the same
probata deberet legitima reputari. Si enim talis appellans laws one proves that when an appellant from the pope
probaret legitime papam tenere fidem christianam esse argues that the pope holds and asserts the Christian faith
falsam, papa nec super ipsum nec super alium to be false, the pope and others are bound to defer to his
350

