[they (reading debent as in Decretum} should anticipate the duty of catechising the man], Again, the same
Augustine, as we find in the above-mentioned distinction, c. Ante baptismum (c. 54): "[Before baptism] they
[reading debent as in Decretum] should anticipate the duty of catechising the man, so that the catacumen may
receive the first rudiments of the faith". And in the following chapter we read as follows: "Twenty days before
baptism let the catacumens meet for the purgation of exorcism; in these twenty days let the whole of the creed,
which is, 'I believe the Godfather Almighty', be taught spiritually". From these [passages] it is clear that before
they turn to other matters those who have been baptized should learn their faith. This is also clearly established
by the treatment in the same distinction 4, chapters Symbolum, Cathecismi, Non lice[a]t, and Postquam [c. 56,
57, 59, 61]. From this it is plainly inferred that every Catholic is bound to believe some things explicitly.
And that some things must be believed implicitly is manifest. For every Catholic is bound to believe the whole
of divine scripture, which however he does not know. And thus they cannot believe it explicitly; it is therefore
enough for them to believe it implicitly.
Moreover because many accept the doctrine of Thomas, his words must be quoted for them, by which the abovementioned distinction is shown. He says, therefore, 2-2, q. 2, art. 5 [delete capitulo quinto]: "With respect to
[delete primum] the first objects of belief, which are the articles of faith, a man is bound to believe" not only
implicitly, but also "explicitly. With respect to other objects of belief, a man is not bound to believe explicitly
but only implicitly or in the preparation of the mind, inasmuch as he is ready to believe whatever is contained in
divine scripture". From these words it is clearly established that some things must be believed explicitly and
others implicitly.
[2] Second, it must be noted what those things are that must be believed explicitly. About this it must be noted
that some things must be believed explicitly (in the ordinary course of Providence [de communi lege]) by all
Christians, because (in the ordinary course of Providence) all Christians are bound to believe them explicitly.
But other things need not be believed explicitly by all, but only by some.
The first things that must be believed explicitly are those that are published among all Catholics as being
Catholic, such as the articles of faith contained in [the creed], "I believe in the father Almighty, the creator...".
For all Christians are bound to believe and learn those articles of faith. Besides those there are also some others
that all are bound to believe explicitly, though they are not contained in the articles of the creed, such as: that the
souls of the wicked go down to hell where they are severely punished, that the souls of the elect who are in
purgatory will be in heaven, that the Demons are tormented in hell, that there are in heaven some other saints and
good persons, and the like, which the Catholic Church is bound to believe explicitly for the reason that they are
explicit Catholic truth published among all Catholics as being Catholic.
Other things, however, must be believed explicitly not by all, because not all Catholics are bound to believe them
explicitly, but those who know that they are contained in divine scripture or in the teaching of the Church. For
those who are bound to know the divine scripture and the doctrine of the Church are bound to believe many
things explicitly, to explicit faith in which others are [add: not?]. For this reason prelates, and especially the
prelate of prelates, that is, the supreme pontiff, are bound to believe many things explicitly that others are not
bound to believe explicitly. And for the sake of those who adhere to the teaching of Thomas, his words must be
reported in this matter. For he says, 2-2. q. 2, art. 6: "The explanation of the faith for inferior men must come
through the greater, and therefore just as the higher angels that illuminate the inferior have fuller knowledge of
divine matters than the inferiors, as Dionysios says in Celestial Hierarchy c. 12, so superior men, to whom it
pertains to teach others, are bound to have fuller knowledge of things to be believed, and to believe more
explicitly". It is clear from these [words] that it is this doctor's opinion that some are bound to believe some
things explicitly to explicit faith in which others are not bound.
But perhaps someone might ask, What are those things to be believed explicitly by some and not by all? They
can be answered, that they are of two kinds. For there are some which necessarily relate to an office some people
have, for example those who have the office of preaching are bound to believe some things explicitly to which
others are not bound; and other things are to be believed explicitly by some and not by all, because it has come to
the knowledge of some they are explicitly contained in divine scripture or in the teaching of the universal
Church, though this has not come to everyone's knowledge: for example some know that it is contained in sacred
literature that Abraham had several wives, and that Eliseus was a prophet after Elias [3 Kings 19:19], and that
Christ fled into Egypt, and therefore those persons are bound to believe those things explicitly. But others are
ignorant that these things are to be found in sacred literature, and they are not bound to believe them explicitly,
but only implicitly. And speaking thus of explicit belief, it can happen that a lay person is bound to believe
something explicitly while someone who is a bishop and also a Master of theology is not at all bound to believe
those points explicitly; for if the lay person knew that it is found in divine scripture that Amasias was the son of
Joas [4 Kings 14:1], he would be bound to believe this explicitly, but the bishop who is a Master of theology, if
he did not hold it in his memory that this is found in divine scripture, would not at that time be bound to believe
it explicitly.
In this [second] way, therefore, of taking the phrase "believe explicitly by someone", everything believable can
be something that must be believed explicitly by someone, because nothing is believable without its being
529

