tenetur statim absque mora haeresim suam dimittere,
ita quod, si convincatur post talem correctionem
eandem haeresim verbo vel scripto tenere aut veram
quomodolibet reputare, est pertinax reputandus.

anyone else at all is bound to put aside his heresy
immediately and without delay, so that if, after this
correction, he is convicted of holding that same heresy
in speech or writing or of thinking in any way that it is
true he should be regarded as pertinacious.

Hoc probant primo sic. Fides nostra non est in
sapientia hominum secundum Apostolum 1 ad
Corinthios 2. Ergo ad hoc quod quis haeresim suam
teneatur dimittere non refert a quo homine sibi per
regulam fidei ostendatur quod opinio sua fidei obviat
orthodoxae; sed si alicui a prelato suo patenter
ostenditur quod opinio sua fidei obviat orthodoxae
eam statim tenetur dimittere, alioquin pertinax est
censendus. Ergo tenetur ad idem a quocunque sibi hoc
extiterit demonstratum.

They prove this first as follows. Our faith does not rest
on the wisdom of men, according to the apostle in 1
Corinthians 2[:5]. With respect to anyone being bound
to put aside his heresy, therefore, it does not matter by
what person it may be shown to him by the rule of
faith that his opinion conflicts with orthodox faith; but
if it is clearly shown to anyone by his prelate that his
opinion conflicts with orthodox faith he is bound to
put it aside immediately, or else he should be
considered pertinacious. He is bound to act the same,
therefore, whoever demonstrates it to him.

Secundo sic. Qui non est paratus corrigi si errat est
pertinax. Sed ille qui correctus legitime a quocunque,
hoc est cui patenter est ostensum quod opinio sua fidei
obviat orthodoxae, non statim opinionem suam dimittit
non est paratus corrigi. Ergo talis est pertinax et
haereticus iudicandus.

[It is proved] secondly as follows. He who is not ready
to be corrected if he errs is pertinacious; but that
person who has been corrected legitimately by anyone
at all -- that is, if it has been clearly shown to him that
his opinion conflicts with orthodox faith -- and does
not put aside his opinion immediately is not ready to
be corrected; that person, therefore, should be judged
pertinacious and a heretic.

Tertio sic. Non minus tenetur quis errorem dimittere si
veritatem invenerit per instructionem cuiuscunque
alterius quam si veritatem invenerit per se ipsum. Qui
autem per seipsum invenerit veritatem statim tenetur
errorem dimittere, exemplo venerabilis Anselmi libro
1 Cur Deus homo c. 18 dicentis, "Certus sum si quid
dico quod Sacrae Scripturae absque dubio contradicat
quod falsum est, nec illud tenere volo si cognovero."
Ergo si veritatem invenerit consonam Sacrae
Scripturae per informationem cuiuscunque alterius,
sive socii sive subditi, errorem contrarium debet
absque mora dimittere.

[It is proved] thirdly in this way. No one is less bound
to put aside his error if he has discovered the truth by
the teaching of anyone else at all than if he has
discovered it by himself. He who has discovered the
truth by himself, however, is bound to put aside his
error immediately, on the example of venerable
Anselm, who says in Cur deus homo book 1 ch. 18, "I
am certain, if anything I say contradicts sacred
scripture without doubt, that it is false and I do not
want to hold it once I have learnt this." If he has
discovered a truth consistent with sacred scripture,
therefore, through the teaching of any other person at
all, whether a companion or a subject, he ought to put
aside without delay an error opposed to it.

Discipulus Secundum ista nulla videtur differentia
inter correctum a praelato et ab alio non praelato,
etiam subdito.

Disciple There seems to be no difference, according to
that, between someone corrected by his prelate or by
someone else not his prelate, even by his subject.

Magister Respondetur quod quantum ad hoc quod
error dimittatur non est differentia, sed quantum ad
alia multa magna differentia reperitur. Praelatus enim
et iurisdictionem habens super alium potest ipsum
citare ad rationem ponere, et ut suam informationem
audiat coartare, et ad publicam revocationem
compellere, ipsumque, si in praedictis et aliis ad suum
pertinentibus officium inventus fuerit contumax et
rebellis, animadversione condigna punire. Qui autem
super errantem iurisdictionem non optinet, in eum
praedicta non poterit exercere.

Master The reply is that there is no difference with
respect to the fact that the error should be put aside,
but with respect to many other things a great
difference is found. For a prelate and someone having
jurisdiction over another can call him to give an
account, compel him to listen to his teaching, force
him to recant publicly and, if he has been found to be
contumacious and rebellious in these matters and
others pertaining to his office, can punish him with a
wholly appropriate punishment. He who does not hold
jurisdiction over one erring, however, can not exercise

145

