which he should both condemn the error of Novatian's teaching and most fully confess the Catholic truth". From
these words we gather that that Donatus was obliged to confess the Catholic faith most fully; therefore he was
also obliged to deny heretical wickedness purely and unconditionally.
The third example is found in De consecratione, dist. 2, c. Ego Berengarius, where it is clearly established that
Berengarius revoked his error purely and without any condition and excuse, indeed anathematized it, saying: "I,
Berengarius, unworthy deacon of the Church of St Maurice of Angers, acknowledging the Catholic and apostolic
faith anathematise every heresy, especially that of which I have formerly been accused, which tries to assert that
the bread and wine" etc. It is clearly established by these words that the revoked his error purely and without any
condition and excuse.
The fourth example concerns blessed Augustine, who having once preached error, revoked that error absolutely,
purely and without any condition. Whence, in his letter to Vincentius [Letter 93], found in 23. q. 6, c. Vides, he
says the following: "My original opinion was that no one should be compelled to Christ's truth, that one must act
by word, fighting by disputation, conquering by argument, lest we have pretended Catholics whom we knew to
be plain heretics. But this opinion of mine was overcome not only by the words of those who contradicted it, but
by examples they pointed out." These words plainly establish that blessed Augustine confessed purely and
without condition that his opinion had been overcome by the truth, and thus he revoked his opinion purely
without any condition; for in a revocation it is not necessary to use the word "revoke", but it is enough to use
equivalent words.
For if anyone says, "I reject this opinion or teaching of mine," or "I say that it is false" or "contrary to the truth";
indeed, if he says, "I confess that that the contrary assertion is true", or utters equivalent words, in truth of fact he
offers to revoke his error purely and without any condition. And in this way Augustine revoked very many errors
of his own, as he himself testifies. At the beginning of his book of Retractations [PL, vol.32, col.583] he says:
"For some time I have been thinking and preparing to do something which, with God's help, I am now
beginning, because I do not think it should be deferred: I am reviewing with a kind of judicial severity my
works---books, letters, tracts---and marking with a censor's pen (so to speak) the things that dissatisfy me. For
only an unwise person will dare to censure me for censuring my own errors. But if he says that I should not have
said the things that afterwards displeased even me, he speaks the truth and agrees with me; in fact he criticises
the things I also criticise... Let those who read these things not imitate me in my error but progress to something
better." These and many other words of blessed Augustine plainly prove that blessed Augustine wished to revoke
his errors purely and without condition. Thus in the book of Retractations, speaking of himself and his own
opinions, he often uses such words as, "it has been said rashly", "it has been said inconsiderately", "I disapprove
this", and "I do not approve", and "it does not please me". We gather evidently from these ways of speaking that
Augustine revoked many errors purely and without any condition and excuse (though in his book of
Retractations many of his sayings he did not revoke, but he reworked them by explaining how he meant them).
But perhaps someone might ask whether Augustine was a heretic, since he had taught many errors against faith.
To this it must be said that after his conversion Augustine was not to be regarded as a heretic for any error,
because he did not hold, or even entertain as an opinion, any error contrary to a Catholic truth published among
all Catholics as Catholic, or any error against a Catholic truth he was obliged to believe explicitly, but he erred
only from ignorance or simplicity, and he sought the truth with careful solicitude, and after he found it, he
immediately corrected himself, and, at an appropriate place and time, revoked his error purely and without any
condition and confessed the Catholic faith most fully.
So in this way it has been shown manifestly that both all heretics and Catholics who err against faith from
ignorance, after they have learnt that they have erred, are obliged to revoke their errors purely and without any
condition. And this same assertion is proved by argument. [i] For every Catholic, at an appropriate place and
time, and with other necessary due circumstances observed, is bound to confess the Catholic truth purely and
without any condition. However, the confession of Catholic truth is the rejection of the contrary heretical
wickedness previously held, and a pure and unconditional revocation of heretical wickedness. So therefore each
person is obliged, at an appropriate time and place and with other due and necessary circumstances observed, to
revoke an error purely and without condition, after he learns that he has erred.
[ii] Further, according to Augustine in his letter to Vincentius, reported in 23, q. 7, last chapter, practically no
one can rejoice that he has been corrected unless he grieves that he has been wrong. And according to Gelasius,
as we read 24, q. 2, c. Legitur, forgiveness must not be granted to anyone unless he corrects himself. Therefore,
similarly, no one can rejoice that he has come back to Catholic truth unless he grieves that he had deviated from
Catholic truth, and consequently he who has erred against the faith---if he comes back truly and not
fictitiously---lays aside all contrary heretical wickedness and error; and he cannot lay aside previous error
perfectly, meritoriously and virtuously unless he satisfies those whom he has previously scandalised, or to whom
he had given occasion of erring; he cannot do this except by revoking the error purely and without any condition.
Therefore he must make such a revocation, if he wishes to satisfy Catholics.
These arguments do not hold of heretics erring not manifestly but in a hidden way, because it is enough for them
to return to Catholic truth, and those who have erred damnably should confess according to the form of the
535

