they deny them - it follows that not all those
pertinaciously clinging to their errors should be added
to the number of the heretics.
Magister Dicunt isti quod Augustinum male intelligis.
Non enim vult Augustinus quod illa tria requirantur ad
hoc quod aliquis sit haereticus, imo vult quod quodlibet
ipsorum haereticum facit errantem. Illa autem tria sic
distinguuntur. Primum est quasi commune et duo sunt
quasi minus communia exponentia quodammodo
primum. Nam quod correcti ut rectum sanumque quid
sapiant contumaciter resistant dupliciter potest
contingere, vel quia emendare, id est revocare, nolunt
vel quia defendere persistunt. Et ita quodlibet illorum
trium errantem reddit haereticum et etiam pertinacem.
Quare omnis pertinax haereticus est censendus.

Master They say that you understand Augustine
wrongly. For he does not mean that those three things
are required for someone to be a heretic; rather he
means that any one of them makes an errant heretical.
However, the three are distinguished in this way. The
first is as it were common and the [other] two are as it
were less common and spell out the first to some
extent. For it can happen in two ways that those who
are corrected that they might be inspired by what is
right and sound resist contumaciously, either because
they refuse to change, that is to revoke [their error], or
because they persist in defending it. And so any one
of those three renders someone erring heretical, and
also pertinacious, because everyone who is
pertinacious should be considered a heretic.

Capitulum 8

Chapter 8

Discipulus Si adhuc sunt aliae auctoritates vel rationes
ad probandum quod nullus errans nisi pertinax est
censendus haereticus libenter auscultabo.

Student If there are still other authorities or reasons to
prove that no one who errs should be considered a
heretic unless he is pertinacious I will willingly listen
to them.

Magister Adhuc rationes aliquae allegantur quarum
prima est haec. Illi qui non sunt a catholicis repellendi
non sunt inter haereticos computandi. Sed errantes et
non pertinaciter non sunt a catholicis repellendi. Ergo
qui non sunt pertinaces non sunt inter haereticos
computandi. Maior posset per sacros canones aperte
probari cum omnes haeretici sint excommunicationis
sententia innodati. Minor etiam clare probatur quia
errantes qui quaerunt veritatem non sunt a catholicis
repellendi, teste Pelagio papa, qui, ut habetur 24. q. 1.
c. Schisma, loquens de abundantibus in suo sensu et
per consequens de errantibus, ait, "Si etiam ipsi, licet in
suo sensu abundantes, intra materna tamen positi
viscera quaererent veritatem a nobis repellendi non
erant." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod quamdiu
errantes, in suo sensu abundantes, quaerunt veritatem,
praetendentes se velle corrigi si veritatem invenerint,
non sunt a catholicis repellendi. Et per consequens
quicunque non sunt pertinaces non sunt a catholicis
repellendi, quia quicunque non est pertinax quaerit
veritatem pro loco et tempore quibus tenetur quaerere
veritatem. Aliter enim pertinax est censendus.

Master Some further arguments are brought forward,
and the first of them is this. Those who should not be
rejected by catholics should not be counted among the
heretics. But errants who are not pertinacious should
not be rejected by catholics. Therefore, those who are
not pertinacious should not be counted among the
heretics. The major [premise] could be proved clearly
by the sacred canons because all heretics are bound by
a sentence of excommunication. The minor [premise]
is also proved clearly, because those who err but seek
the truth should not be rejected by catholics, as Pope
Pelagius attests who, speaking about those fully
persuaded in their own mind and consequently about
those who are in error, as we find in 24, q. 1, c.
Schisma [col.979], says, "If they too, though fully
persuaded in their own mind, were seeking the truth
while yet placed in the maternal womb it would not
have been necessary for us to reject them." We are
given to understand by these words that even if errants
are fully persuaded in their own mind, as long as they
are seeking the truth and showing themselves willing
to be corrected if they discover the truth, they should
not be rejected by catholics. And consequently those
who are not pertinacious should not be rejected by
catholics because whoever is not pertinacious is
seeking the truth in [the appropriate] place and time
from those from whom he is bound to seek it. For
otherwise he ought to be considered pertinacious.

Secunda ratio est haec. Quicunque paratus est corrigi

A second argument is this. Whoever is ready to be

97

