Nicholaus papa ait: "ubinam legistis imperatores [col. 338] "where have you read that the emperors, your
antecessores vestros sinodalibus conventibus interfuisse, predecessors, were present at synodal gatherings? Unless
nisi forsitan in quibusdam ubi de fide tractatum est, que perhaps at some where the faith, which is universal,
universalis est, que omnium communis est, que non which is the common concern of all, which pertains not
solum ad clericos verum etiam ad laicos et ad omnes only to clerks but also to laymen and to all Christians
omnino pertinet christianos"), ideo non solum litigantis whatsoever, was being discussed". Therefore it is the
sed etiam cuiuslibet catholici interest contra iniquam business not just of the litigant but also of any catholic to
sententiam pape contra fidem prolatam appellare, quia appeal from an unjust sentence of the pope rendered
talis sententia cuilibet christiano preiudicium noscitur against the faith, because such a judgement is known to
generare. Ad secundam respondetur quod nonnunquam prejudice any Christian. The answer to the second
ad alium finem fit accusatio criminosi et appellatio ab objection is that on various occasions the accusation of a
aliquo criminoso. Accusatur enim criminosus ut de criminal serves a different purpose than the appeal from
commisso crimine puniatur, sed appellatur ab aliquo ne some criminal. For a criminal is accused so that he may
aliquid in futurum in preiudicium appellantis attemptet. be punished on account of the committed crime, while
Et ideo si papa hereticus omnino cessaret a papali one appeals from someone lest he attempt something in
officio renuntiando papatui, posset de heresi accusari the future which would prejudice the appellant. And thus
sed non esset necesse appellare ab ipso. Sed si papa if a heretic pope were to wholly cease to perform papal
hereticus a papali non cessaret officio, cum hoc functions by renouncing the papacy, he could be accused
redundet in preiudicium cuiuslibet christiani quilibet of heresy but it would not be necessary to appeal from
christianus ab ipso vel contra ipsum poterit appellare, him. But if a heretic pope would not desist from
ipsum ad causam et iudicium provocando.
exercising the papal office, then since this would
redound to any Christian's prejudice, any Christian might
appeal from a heretic pope or against him by challenging
him to appear in court and answer for his case.
Discipulus: Ad quid distinguitur inter appellationem Student: What is the point of a distinction between an
que fit post sententiam diffinitivam et appellationem que appeal that is made after a definitive judgement, and an
fit extra iudicium.
appeal that is made outside of the legal process.
Magister: Ideo distinguitur quia in appellatione que fit Master: The distinction is made because in an appeal
post diffinitivam sententiam non oportet in speciali issued after a definitive judgement one doesn't need to
allegare causam sed sufficit dicere sententiam esse specifically mention the substance of the case; it merely
iniquam. Unde si duo litigarent coram papa super aliqua suffices to state that the judgement is unjust. Thus if two
certa questione fidei, puta si unus accusaret alium quod people were to litigate before the pope with respect to
esset hereticus quia pertinaciter asseruisset usuram non some identifiable question of faith (for instance, if one of
esse peccatum, vel Christum non contingenter sed them were to accuse the other of being a heretic because
necessitate absoluta fuisse passum et crucifixum, aut he had pertinaciously claimed that usury was not a sin,
apostolos nunquam post missionem Spiritus Sancti per or that Christ's passion and crucifixion were not the
unam diem integram duxisse vitam communem cum results of contingent choices but were absolutely
aliis, aut legem christianam non esse veram et sanctam, determined, or that the apostles had not experienced for a
vel Christum falsum fuisse prophetam, et papa single day a state of common life with others after the
diffinitivam daret sententiam pro eo quod non esset arrival of the Holy Spirit, or that the Christian law was
hereticus quia assertio sua esset catholica, liceret actori neither true nor holy, or that Christ was a false prophet),
appellare a papa, allegando solummodo quod sententia and the pope were to render a definitive judgement in
sua esset iniqua et contra fidem catholicam, nec favour of the accused, confirming that he was no heretic
oporteret specialiter explicare in quo sua sententia fidei because his assertion was catholic, the accuser would be
obviaret. Si autem extra iudicium aut ante sententiam permitted to appeal from the pope, alleging only that his
diffinitivam voluerit quis appellare, oportet quod sentence was unjust, nor would he be required to explain
causam talem in speciali alleget, que si esset probata specifically the particulars as to which the pope's
deberet legitima reputari. Non enim sufficit in tali sentence clashed with the faith. But if someone wanted
appellatione dicere ad hoc ut legitima reputetur quod to appeal outside of the judicial process or before the
papa est hereticus sed oportet exprimere in quo est rendering of a definitive judgement, he would need to
hereticus, puta quod est hereticus quia pertinaciter docet argue the specifics of the case, and that if proved in court
aut tenet fidem christianam non esse veram, aut the case would be considered legitimate. For in this
Christum non descendisse de David, aut in Christo non second type of appeal it does not suffice (in order for it
fuisse duas substantias, aut aliquid huiusmodi quod fidei to be considered legitimate) to merely state that the pope
obviat orthodoxe.
is a heretic. One needs to express the particulars of his
heresy, for instance that he is a heretic because he
pertinaciously teaches or holds that the Christian faith is
untrue, or that Christ was not a descendant of David, or
that there were not two substances in Christ's nature, or
301

