allegando quod non sit inter hereses computanda, et either by having these burned or through some other
eodem modo contingit scripto heresim defendere.
means, or by maliciously confiscating them and
preventing them from coming to the notice of others.
One may also defend heretical wickedness verbally, by
contending that it ought not to be numbered among the
heresies; and one may similarly defend heresy in
writing.
Discipulus: Secundum predicta de defensoribus Student: According to the aforementioned there would
hereticorum et heretice pravitatis essent quamplurima be a large number of issues needing to be investigated
indaganda, sed abbreviationis causa multa dimittam. concerning defenders of heretics and of heretical
Aliqua tamen queram. Porro quia dubito, quod si wickedness, but I shall put aside many for the sake of
unquam aliquis papa erit hereticus, perniciosior et brevity. Some, however, I shall pursue. Furthermore,
periculosior erit omnibus aliis hereticis qui fuerunt vel since I consider it arguable that if some pope were ever
erunt preter Antichristum magnum, si tamen idem to become a heretic, he would be more harmful and
Antichristus non erit papa, interrogationes quas faciam more dangerous than all the other heretics past and
de defensoribus hereticorum et heretice pravitatis ad future except for the Great Antichrist (assuming, that is,
defensores pape heretici et sequacium eius suarumque that this Antichrist would not be the pope himself), [cf.
heresum applicabo. In primis itaque dic qua pena sint 1 Dial. 6.19] I shall apply any future questions
plectendi qui de facto impediunt ne de persona pape concerning the defenders of heretics and of heretical
heretici fiat iustitie complementum, se de eius erroribus wickedness to the defenders of a heretic pope and of his
defendendis nullatenus intromittendo.
followers, as well as of his heresies. Tell me at the
outset what penalty should be inflicted on those who
actively prevent justice taking its final course with
respect to the person of a heretic pope, but do not
involve themselves in the defense of his errors.
Magister: Respondetur quod tales impedientes et pape Master: The answer is that such obstructionists, who
heretico impedienti opem ferentes ne de ipso fiat iustitie assist a heretic and obstructionist pope in avoiding the
complementum, aut sciunt papam esse hereticum, aut final course of justice as to his person, either know that
ignorant, et si ignorant, aut laborant ignorantia crassa et the pope is a heretic, or they do not know it. If they do
supina, quia nolunt aut contempnunt aut negligunt scire not know, then, either their ignorance is grossly passive
papam esse hereticum, vel laborant ignorantia probabili. (for they do not want to know, or scorn to know, or
Si sciunt papam esse hereticum vel ignorant et laborant neglect to know that the pope is a heretic), or it is
ignorantia crassa et supina, et tamen eidem opem ferunt justifiable. If they know that the pope is a heretic, or are
ne fiat de eo iustitie complementum et se de eius ignorant of this due to grossly passive ignorance, and
erroribus nullatenus intromittunt, imo asserunt forte yet help him to avoid the final course of justice while
manifeste eius errores esse contrarios catholice veritati, not involving themselves in a defense of his errors,
sunt defensores heretici, licet non sunt directe perhaps even asserting openly that his errors are
defensores nec approbatores heretice pravitatis. Et ideo contrary to catholic truth, then they are defenders of a
penam hereticorum nequaquam incurrunt, sed in heretic, even if they are not directly defenders of, or
sententiam incidunt excommunicationis et carere debent assenters to, heretical wickedness. And therefore, in no
ecclesiastica sepultura (Extra, De hereticis, Sicut, et way do they incur the punishment of heretics, but they
Extra, De sententia excommunicationis, Noverit). Alie rather lapse into a sentence of excommunication, and
etiam pene eorum, si in excommunicatione per annum cannot have the benefit of a legitimate church burial
persistunt,
taxantur
Extra,
De
hereticis, (Extra, De hereticis, Sicut, [cols. 779-780] and Extra,
Excommunicamus 1. Quedam etiam pene eorum De sententia excommunicationis, Noverit). [col. 910]
speciales taxantur Extra, De hereticis, Si adversus. Si And other punishments await them (mentioned in Extra,
autem ignorant papam esse hereticum, et laborant De hereticis, Excommunicamus 1) [cols. 787-789] if
ignorantia probabili, nullam penam incurrunt.
they remain excommunicated for an entire year. Some
of their further punishments are mentioned in Extra, De
hereticis, Si adversus. [cols. 783-784] But if they do not
know that the pope is a heretic, and their ignorance is
justifiable, they incur no punishment.
Discipulus: Nunquid scientes papam esse hereticum vel Student: Must those who know that the pope is a
etiam ignorantes, sed laborantes ignorantia crassa et heretic (or even those who are ignorant of this, but
supina, ad quos spectat et qui possunt facere de papa whose ignorance is grossly passive), and who have
heretico iustitie complementum, si negligunt, debent authority and power to inflict terminal justice upon a
inter defensores pape heretici computari.
heretic pope, be classified among defenders of a heretic
pope if they neglect the performance of their function.
Magister: Una est opinio quod sunt defensores pape Master: One opinion holds that they are defenders of a
457

