in sue appellationis vel recusationis preiudicium state of corrupt human nature, though not in the original
exercere.
state of human nature. One might likewise say that such
a suspension is from divine law because it can be shown
by divine law that the pope must not exercise such
authority in prejudice of the given person's appeal or
demurrer.
Capitulum 49
Chapter 49
Discipulus: Apparet quod isti per talem suspensionem Student: It appears that these theorists do not understand
non aliud intelligunt nisi quod papa tali appellationi vel by this suspension anything else except that the pope is
recusationi deferre tenetur, ideo obmittamus verbum obligated to honour such an appeal or demurrer.
'suspensionis' et conare probare quod papa tali Therefore let us put aside the term "suspension", and
appellationi vel recusationi deferre tenetur, videlicet attempt to prove that the pope is bound to honour this
appellantem vel recusantem propter appellationem vel appeal or demurrer, namely by not disturbing the
recusationem nullatenus molestando ante decisionem appellant or the person entering the demurrer on account
cause.
of the appeal or demurrer prior to a decision of the case.
Magister: Quod papa teneatur tali appellationi vel Master: It seems possible to prove that the pope is
recusationi deferre videtur posse probari primo sic. Papa bound to honour such an appeal or demurrer. Here is the
in hiis que sunt ad alterum non debet dominium vel first proof. The pope must not exercise lordship or power
potentiam contra iustitiam vel misericordiam exercere, against justice or mercy in those issues which affect the
iuxta illud beati Petri: "neque ut dominantes in cleris". interests of others, in conformity with the statement of
Sed si papa appellationi vel recusationi huiusmodi non blessed Peter: "neither as being lords over God's
deferat, erga appellantem vel recusantem nec iustitiam heritage". [1 Peter 5:3] But if the pope did not honour
nec misericordiam sed dominium et potentiam such an appeal or demurrer he would be exercising
exerceret. Quod non iustitiam patet, quia ad iustitiam neither justice nor mercy, but rather lordship and power
minime spectat appellationi vel recusationi non deferre towards the appellant or the person entering the
antequam constet eam non esse legitimam. Nec etiam demurrer. That he would not be exercising justice is
misericordiam, constat, quia nullam facit taliter clear, since it hardly pertains to justice not to honour an
appellanti vel recusanti, appellationi vel recusationi appeal or demurrer before its illegitimacy has been
minime deferendo. Exercet ergo potentiam et dominium established. Nor does he exercise mercy, as is obvious,
absque ratione, imo contra rationem. Ergo dampnabiliter since he manifests none towards the appellant or the
peccat.
person entering the demurrer by not honouring the
appeal or demurrer. Therefore he exercises power and
lordship without reason, and indeed against reason.
Therefore he sins grievously.
Secundo sic. Si papa non tenetur tali appellationi vel Here is the second proof. If the pope is not bound to
recusationi deferre, aut hoc est quia nulli appellationi honour such an appeal or demurrer, this is either because
vel recusationi pro causa heresis interiecte deferre he is not bound to honour any appeal or demurrer issued
tenetur, aut quia scit talem appellationem vel or entered for cause of heresy, or because he knows this
recusationem esse iniquam et causam assignatam esse appeal or demurrer to be criminal and the cause alleged
falsam. Non propter primum, quia si causa assignata to be false. The first possibility does not fit, because if
esset vera, puta quod teneret fidem christianam esse the cause alleged were true, that is to say if the pope
falsam, tali appellationi vel recusationi deferre deberet. were to maintain that the Christian faith was false, he
Nec propter secundum, quia falsitas cause non impedit would be obligated to honour the relevant appeal or
quominus debeat quis appellationi vel recusationi demurrer. The second possibility also does not fit,
deferre, dummodo sit talis que si esset probata deberet because the falsity of a cause does not prevent one from
legitima reputari. Relinquitur ergo quod papa tali being required to honour an appeal or demurrer, so long
appellationi vel recusationi deferre tenetur.
as this cause if proved would have to be considered
legitimate. It remains therefore that the pope must
honour such an appeal or demurrer.
Tertio sic. Iudex debet illi appellationi vel recusationi Here is the third proof. A judge must honour an appeal
deferre quamvis sciat eam esse iniquam et causam or a demurrer, even if he knows it to be criminal and the
assignatam esse falsam cui alii deferre tenentur. Sed alii cause alleged to be false, if it is an appeal or demurrer,
a papa tali appellationi vel recusationi deferre tenentur, which others must honour. But there are people other
ergo etiam papa debet deferre eidem. Ad hoc etiam than the pope who must honour this appeal or demurrer.
possunt allegari rationes supra cap. 45 inducte.
Therefore the pope likewise must honour it. The reasons
provided earlier in chapter 45 may also be argued in
support of this contention.
Capitulum 50
Chapter 50
Discipulus: Post predicta ad interrogationem quamStudent: After what we have just discussed, I would like
360

