malefacere prohibetur, ut testatur Augustinus contra payment. Here is the sixth proof. To defend a partner is
Petilianum et ponitur 23 q.5 Ad fidem. Ergo nemo to confer a benefit. But no one is bound to confer a
tenetur socium gratis defendere. Hec sunt quibus probari benefit upon someone for no remuneration, since the
videtur quod socius non tenetur socium gratis defendere, laws force no one to confer benefits, but only prevents
ex quo sequitur quod non tenentur omnes catholici wrongdoing, witness Augustine against Petilianus (and
impugnantes papam hereticum defensare.
this is recorded in 23 q. 5 Ad fidem).[col. 939] Therefore
no one is obligated to defend a partner for nothing.
These are the reasons, which appear to prove that a
partner is not obligated to defend a partner gratis, from
which it follows that all catholics are not obligated to
defend the opponents of a heretic pope.
Porro quia, ut estimo, frater M. et adherentes sibi illos Furthermore, since I reckon that brother M. and his
qui ipsos contra summum pontificem non defendunt supporters consider those who do not defend them
reprehensibiles arbitrantur, putantes quod non solum pro against the supreme pontiff to be blameworthy, and think
causa fidei patientes sed etiam alii pro levioribus causis that not only individuals who suffer for the cause of faith
sustinentes persecutiones et iniurias non tantum a but also others who experience persecutions and injuries
prelatis sed etiam a sociis et aliis sunt pro viribus for the sake of less serious causes must be strongly
defendendi, peto quod assertionem predictam, quod defended, not just by prelates but also by partners and
socius videlicet tenetur defendere socium, allegationibus others, I ask that you attempt to bolster the aforesaid
quantum potes fortioribus munire coneris, et quomodo assertion, namely that a partner is obligated to defend a
ad rationes in contrarium quas adduxi frater M. et sui partner, with the strongest possible arguments, and that
respondeant studeas propalare. Per huiusmodi enim et you undertake to show how brother M. and his friends
impugnationes quibus predicti frater M. et sui dominum respond to the objections which I outlined. Indeed such
summum pontificem et sibi adherentes impugnare an approach will allow me to understand more
conantur magis profunde intelligam, et quomodo debent profoundly the aggressive theories with which the
reprobari et refelli evidentius animadvertam.
aforementioned brother M. and his friends are trying to
oppose the Lord supreme pontiff and his adherents, and I
shall grasp more evidently how these theories must be
rebuked and rejected.
Capitulum 43
Chapter 43
Magister: Nequaquam deciperis estimando quod frater Master: You will in no wise be deceived if you reckon
M. et adherentes sibi valde reprehensibiles nonnullos that brother M. and his associates consider some
reputant christianos et a peccato mortali nullatenus Christians to be highly blameworthy, and not to be
excusandos pro eo quod eis defensionem contra excused from mortal sin by their failure to defend them
dominum I. non impendunt, dicentes quod quilibet, cum against the Lord J. Brother M. and his associates contend
potest, modo congruenti et sibi possibili tenetur socium that anyone, if he can, is obligated (by using a method
iniuriam patientem defendere et a periculo liberare. Ex both appropriate and personally possible) to defend a
quo moliuntur inferre quod cum ipsi propter iustitiam et partner who suffers harm and to liberate him from
fidem catholicam persecutiones gravissimas patiantur, danger. From this they attempt to deduce that since they
sunt a catholicis defendendi et a periculis liberandi.
are suffering the most serious of persecutions for the
sake of justice and the catholic faith, they must be
defended by catholics and liberated from dangers.
Quod autem socius socium patientem iniuriam, cum It indeed appears possible to demonstrate by authorities,
potest, modo sibi congruenti et possibili, teneatur etiam reasons, and examples that a partner, if he can and in a
gratis defendere, auctoritatibus, rationibus, et exemplis way both appropriate and possible to him, is obligated to
videtur posse probari. Hoc enim Ambrosius, ut defend without payment a partner who is suffering harm.
allegatum est superius, vocaliter et sententialiter videtur For as was argued earlier, [1 Dial. 6.37] this is what
asserere dicens: "qui enim non repellit a socio iniuriam, Ambrose appears to assert both by words and in
si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille, qui facit". Ex quibus substance when he states; "for he who does not, if he
verbis colligitur quod qui non defendit socium culpam can, prevent a partner from being harmed, is just as
incurrit, quia repellere iniuriam est defendere guilty as the one who commits the misdeed". [col. 898]
reputandum.
One gathers from these words that he who does not
defend a partner commits a sin, because to prevent harm
from being done should be considered identical to
providing a defense.
Discipulus: Ad hoc respondet glossa ibidem dicens: "si Student: The contextual gloss states [col. 1294] in reply
potest, id est si est in potestate positus". Ex quibus to this: "if he can, that is to say, if he wields an
verbis glosse datur intelligi quod Ambrosius loquitur de authoritative office". One gathers from these words of
prelatis.
the gloss that Ambrose is referring to prelates.
338

