28.
29.
30.

31.

32.
33.
34.

15.3

"Edd" to mean all the early editions, "Mss" all the manuscripts. The siglum of a witness with "-m" or "b" added will be used to mean that the variant is found in the margin or between lines in the witness:
e.g. "Frm", Frb".
Insertion in margin or between lines of something omitted from the text of the witness will be noted
thus: "omitted Fr, added Frm"--there is no need to say what is added, since the reader will assume that it
is the same as what is omitted.
Marginal or interlinear material not part of the text (such as summaries, queries, comments, etc.) will
not be recorded in the apparatus. If such material seems especially significant (e.g. Plumetot's
marginalia to BN ms. lat. 14313) it can be dealt with in a note or an essay.
Capitalisation: In the text: Apostolus for Paul, apostol- otherwise; imperator for emperor, Imperium for
[Roman] Empire; papa for pope even in an individual's title [Gregorius papa for Pope Gregory]; capital
for Deus; capital for Dominus when it means Christ or God, capitals for Spiritus Sanctus; capitals for
Sacra Scriptura and Divina Scriptura; capitals for names of orders, and for Order when it refers to a
named order. In the apparatus, lemmata and variants will all be lower case (in the apparatus only sigla
will be capitalised).
In the first and third series of footnotes there will be no terminal stops. In the second series when the
note consists of references there will be no full stop and no initial capital; but normal capitalisation and
punctuation will be used for material other than references (e.g. in comments by the editor). For
example: "col. 49; cf. gloss, s. v. excipiatur auctoritas, col. 112"; "col. 565. But it seems to show the
opposite."
In cross-references in the second footnote series the word in the text (e.g. prius) will be repeated at the
beginning of the note, lower case, followed by a colon.
Magister and Discipulus as the characters speaking will be bold and followed by a colon.
If further experience suggests that any of the above points need to be modified, this will be done by
consultation among the editors and with the Medieval Text committee.

NOTES

1. This is the traditional aim of a critical edition. We do not accept the view that an editor's
task is to present without "contamination" the text of the best or most representative
manuscript(s), or the texts of the extant manuscripts. We will attempt to go behind the
witnesses to reconstruct the text Ockham intended to circulate.
2. For Offler's practice see, for example, OP, vol. 1, (edition 2), pp. 294-5. Offler italicises all
quotations, including unacknowledged quotations. He does not italicise any word or letter not
found in the modern edition of the source; he does not seem to have any way of indicating
transpositions or omissions. Differences between the quotation and the modern edition of the
source are noted in his apparatus (whereas we will put them in the second footnote series).
See OP, vol. 4, p. 57.
3. Offler mixes modern Latin spelling (e.g. haeresis, where MSS have heresis) with medieval
spelling (e.g. nichil, dampnatione, temptat).
4. In general, "ae" and "oe" dipthongs are reduced to "e", "tio" becomes "cio", "v" is always
used at the beginning of words and "u" in other positions ("vnde", "amaui"); there are some
differences in the spelling of some words (e.g "nichil", "dampnare", "tollerare"). It seems that
the "v/u" convention is a matter of letter form rather than spelling, so we would not adopt it.
We are considering whether this may be true also of "tio/cio".
5. English rather than German; thus there will be no comma before a defining relative clause.
6. Offler uses small roman numerals; see OP, vol. 4, p. 103.
1005

