Magister: Respondetur quod reges et principes scienter Master: The answer is that kings and princes who
faventes pape heretico, ratione potentie temporalis qua knowingly support a heretic pope, sin more seriously
absque periculo temporali valent sibi resistere, gravius than others, by reason of the temporal power which
peccant quam alii. Nam alii, qui non tanta vallantur would make it possible for them to resist this pope
potentia, absque forte aliquali periculo pape heretico without temporal danger. For others, not having such
resistere non valerent, et ita timor periculi attenuaret power to safeguard them, would perhaps not be in a
peccatum eorum. Et ex isto concluditur quod, quanto position to resist the heretic pope without some danger,
aliqui maiorem defensionem haberent quam alii, tanto and thus the fear of danger would reduce the seriousness
gravius peccarent pape heretico favendo. Si enim aliquis of their sin. And from this one concludes that to the
rex vel princeps omnes resistentes pape heretico in extent that some would have greater defense capabilities
dominio suo manentes defenderet, vel eos minime than others, to that extent they would sin more seriously
impugnaret, multo gravius delinquerent qui, manentes in in supporting a heretic pope. Indeed, if some king or
dominio illius regis vel principis, pape heretico aliquo prince were to defend (or fail to attack) all those
modo faverent, quam alii commorantes in dominiis residing in his dominion who resisted a heretic pope,
regum et principum qui resistentes pape heretico they would commit a far greater offence who would
nequaquam defenderent sed persequerentur, vel persequi support the heretic pope in some manner while residing
et molestari ab aliis minime prohiberent.
in the dominion of this king or prince, than others
residing in the dominions of kings and princes who
would not defend opponents of a heretic pope, but either
persecute them or fail to prevent their being persecuted
and harmed by others.
Discipulus: Mirum videtur quod reges et principes in Student: It seems astonishing that in this case kings and
hoc casu gravius peccarent quam prelati, cum magis princes would sin more seriously than prelates, since it
pertineat ad prelatos obviare pape heretico quam ad is more the function of prelates to resist a heretic pope
reges et principes.
than that of kings and princes.
Magister: Respondetur quod quidam prelati inter Master: The answer is that some prelates are numbered
principes, ratione temporalis potentie, computantur, et among princes by reason of their temporal power, and
ideo illi prelati favendo pape heretico peccarent therefore these prelates would sin most seriously by
gravissime, quia peccatum aliorum aliquo modo favouring a heretic pope, since the sin of the other
attenuaret timor periculi temporalis. Cum vero dicis prelates would be diminished in some measure by their
quod ad prelatos magis spectat obviare pape heretico fear of temporal danger. When you claim, however, that
quam ad reges et principes, respondetur quod ad omnes it is more the function of prelates to resist a heretic pope
spectat obviare pape heretico, quia, sicut notat glossa than that of kings and princes, the answer is that all have
Extra, De hereticis, Vergentis: "quod in religionem the function of resisting a heretic pope, because, as the
divinam committitur, in omnium fertur iniuriam, et gloss to Extra, De hereticis, Vergentis notes: "what is
publicum crimen committitur, Codice, eodem titulo, lege committed against the Christian religion is an injury
Manichaeos". Sic etiam, ut habetur dis.1: "ius publicum which affects everyone, and it is the commission of a
est in sacris et sacerdotibus et magistratibus", ubi dicit public crime, Codice, eo.tit., l. Manichaeos". [s.v. longe
glossa: "unde qui ledit sacerdotes, vel res sacras, ab sit gravius, col. 1676] Similarly, we have this in dis. 1:
omnibus tanquam pro publico crimine potest accusari". "public right consists in the sacred, the priesthood, and
Multo magis ius publicum in fide christiana consistit, et the administration", [c. 11, col. 3] where the gloss
multo fortius qui ledit et impingit fidem catholicam states: "hence, he who does harm to priests, or to sacred
tanquam pro publico crimine potest ab omnibus objects, may be accused by all as one who has
accusari, quare omnes tenentur pape heretico tanquam committed a public crime". [col. 6] Much more does
publicum crimen committenti resistere. Et ita ad reges et public right consist in the Christian religion, and much
principes spectat pape heretico obviare. Et hoc similiter more strongly may someone who harms and impacts
spectat ad prelatos qui etiam inter principes nullatenus upon the catholic faith be accused by all as one who has
numerantur, sed quodammodo aliter. Quia ad reges et committed a public crime. Therefore everybody is
principes spectat contra papam hereticum exercere obligated to resist a heretic pope as someone who is
potentiam temporalem, nisi essent aliqui qui vellent committing a public crime. And thus kings and princes
sponte ex instinctu divino subire martyrium, have the function of opposing a heretic pope. This
quemadmodum legio Thebeorum ad martyrium se pertains in similar fashion even to those prelates who
sponte obtulit, licet, si voluisset, armis materialibus are not numbered among the princes, but here the
restitisset.
approach is somewhat different. For it is the task of
kings and princes to exercise temporal authority against
a heretic pope, unless there be some among them who
wish to submit voluntarily to martyrdom by divine
inspiration, just as the Theban legion spontaneously
offered itself to martyrdom, although, had it wanted to,
475

