impugnationem pravitatis heretice paterentur, maxime si were badly motivated in their attack on the heretic pope,
ex omissione defensionis ipsorum periculum fidei he would still have the duty to defend them, so that they
immineret, quia in hoc magis veritas defenderetur would not suffer because of their opposition to heretical
catholica quam pravitatem hereticam impugnantes. Ad wickedness, above all if there was an imminent danger to
veritatem autem catholicam defendendam universi the faith by this neglect of their defense; because in this
catholici sunt astricti.
context it is the catholic faith which would be defended,
more so than the persons of those who are attacking
heretical wickedness. And all catholics are bound to
defend the catholic faith.
Discipulus: De quo periculo fidei imminente intelligitur Student: What imminent danger to the faith is
dicta assertio cum dicit quod taliter impugnantes papam understood by the assertion we are discussing when it
hereticum sunt tuendi quando periculum fidei states that such opponents of a heretic pope must be
immineret.
protected when there is an imminent danger to the faith.
Magister: Respondetur quod intelligitur de periculo Master: The answer is that this is understood of an
fidei in una regione vel regno imo etiam uni soli homini imminent danger to the faith in one region, or one
imminente, quia si quis probabiliter estimaret quod kingdom, indeed even in the soul of a single person,
unum regnum vel regio aut civitas vel etiam unus homo because if someone were probably to surmise that one
averteretur a fide vel faveret heretice pravitati nisi taliter kingdom or one region or one city or even a single
impugnantibus
papam
hereticum
defensionem human being would be turned away from the faith or
impenderet, ipse non tuendo, si posset, mortaliter would give support to heretical wickedness unless
peccaret.
defense was provided to the opponents of a heretic pope,
that someone would commit a mortal sin by failing to
give them protection if he could.
Capitulum 41
Chapter 41
Discipulus: Assertionem predictam, ut estimo, clare Student: I think that I clearly understand the assertion
intelligo, quamvis non sit michi demonstratum quod we are examining, although its truthfulness has not been
contineat veritatem, pro qua adhuc allegare coneris ut demonstrated to me. Continue the task of offering
sciam fundamenta quibus frater M. et sui sequaces arguments in support of it, so that I may know the
probare nituntur quod sunt a catholicis contra summum theoretical foundations whereby brother M. and his
pontificem defendendi.
followers attempt to prove that they must be defended by
catholics against the supreme pontiff.
Magister: Assertio memorata decimo tali ratione Master: Here is what appears to be a tenth possible
videtur posse probari. Illud sine quo periclitatur tam proof in support of the examined assertion. That, the
fides catholica quam humana societas magis est a absence of which endangers both the catholic faith and
catholicis impendendum pro fide catholica conservanda human society, should be provided by catholics more for
quam pro societate servanda, eo quod quilibet catholicus the preservation of the catholic faith than for the
magis zelare tenetur pro fide quam pro societate preservation of society, since every catholic is obligated
humana. Absque mutua tamen defensione periclitatur to show a greater zeal for the faith than for human
tam catholica fides quam humana societas. Pro humana society. But in the absence of mutual defense both the
autem societate servanda Christiani sibi debent auxilium catholic faith and human society are endangered. And
mutuum impendere, quia quemadmodum Veritate Christians are obligated to afford each other mutual
testante, ut habetur Matth. 12: "omne regnum divisum assistance for the preservation of human society, because
contra se desolatur, et omnis civitas vel domus divisa as Truth attests in Matthew 12: "every kingdom divided
contra se non stabit", sic omnis societas per mutuam against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or
defensionem minime colligata non stabit, quod Veritas house divided against itself shall not stand". [Matthew
Ipsa ubi prius insinuare videtur aperte cum dicit: "qui 12:25] Thus, every society which is not united by mutual
non est mecum contra me est et qui non congregat defense will not stand, and this Truth Itself seems to
mecum spargit". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod qui openly convey in the cited context when It states: "he
non est cum aliquo, ipsum modo sibi congruenti et that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth
possibili defendendo, contra ipsum esse dinoscitur. Ex not with me scattereth abroad". [Matthew 12:30] One
quo sequitur quod talis societas minime stabit. Et ita pro gathers from these words that he who is not with
societate humana servanda debet unus alii defensionem someone, providing him with defense in a way both
impendere. Ergo multo magis pro servanda fide appropriate and possible, is known to be against that
catholica debet unus alteri defensionem et tuitionem someone. From which it follows that such a society will
cum potest impendere. Ex quo infertur quod not stand. And thus one person is obligated to provide
impugnantibus papam hereticum est defensio defense to another so that human society might be
exhibenda.
preserved. Therefore all the more must someone provide
defense and protection to another, if he can, so that the
catholic faith might be preserved. From which one
335

