ita in interpretatione legum ea que frequenter et non que happen that some people did lapse into such tremendous
raro accidunt sunt pensanda. Quare cum raro vel insanity once or twice, and proceeded to mendaciously
nunquam accidat quod aliquis appellando vel recusando impose such a crime on an innocent pope, appealing
papam sibi imponat quod fidem abnegaverit from him or entering a demurrer against him on that
christianam, cum ista sit causa que si esset probata basis, such appeals or demurrers would not normally
deberet legitima reputari, concluditur quod iura que have to be rejected on this account. For in the enactment
asserunt quod est appellationibus et recusationibus of laws no less than in their interpretation we must be
deferendum in quibus assignatur causa que si esset oriented towards those circumstances which occur
probata deberet legitima reputari, ad appellationem et frequently and not towards those which occur but rarely.
recusationem pape in qua pro causa assignatur quod Thus, since it rarely or never happens that someone in
papa fidem christianam asserit esse falsam sunt appealing or entering a demurrer against the pope
omnimode extendenda.
imposes on the latter a denial of the Christian faith
(which is a cause that, if proved, would have to be
considered legitimate) one concludes that the laws,
which assert that one must honour appeals and demurrers
in which a cause is alleged which, if proved, would have
to be considered legitimate, must always be extended to
an appeal or demurrer against the pope in which the
cause alleged is that the pope asserts the Christian faith
to be false.
Secunda instantia tua per rationem quartam autem Your second instance is rejected by reference to the
superius factam refellitur, ubi ostensum est quod fourth reason advanced earlier, where it is demonstrated
cuilibet licet accusare papam de heretica pravitate et that anyone is permitted to accuse the pope of heretical
eius appellationi et recusationi pro causa heresis est wickedness, and that his appeal or demurrer in the cause
omnimode deferendum, cum minus sit appellare vel of heresy must always be honoured, since it is a lesser
iudicem recusare quam accusare eundem.
matter to appeal from or to enter a demurrer against a
judge than to level an accusation against him.
Capitulum 46
Chapter 46
Discipulus: Ex quo allegasti pro assertione dicente quod Student: Since you have argued in support of the
deferendum est appellationi seu recusationi pape assertion which states that one must honour an appeal or
antequam constet talem appellationem vel recusationem a demurrer against the pope before it is established that
non esse legitimam, quia causa videlicet allegata non est such appeal or demurrer is not legitimate (namely,
probata licet sit talis que, si esset probata, deberet because the cause alleged has not been proved, even if it
legitima reputari, peto ut pro assertione contraria aliquas is such that would be considered legitimate if proved), I
allegationes adducas.
now ask you to provide some arguments in support of
the contrary assertion.
Magister: Quod nescientes et dubitantes talem Master: It appears that one may initially prove as
appellationem vel recusationem esse legitimam eidem follows that those who do not know and those who doubt
deferre non debeant, maxime si papa sciens causam esse that such an appeal or demurrer is legitimate have no
falsam non defert eidem videtur posse probari primo sic. obligation to honour it, above all if the pope does not
Preceptis pape oportet non solum in certis sed etiam in defer to the cause knowing it to be false. It is appropriate
dubiis obedire, cum etiam in dubiis precepto regis to obey the pope's commands not only in matters which
sacrilegi miles debeat obedire, teste Augustino qui, ut are certain, but also in matters which are doubtful, since
legitur 23 q. 1 c. Quid culpatur, ait: "vir iustus, si forte a soldier must obey the command of a sacrilegious
etiam sub rege, homine sacrilego, militet, recte potest monarch even in doubtful matters, witness Augustine
illo iubente bellare, si, vice pacis ordinem servans, quod (we read this in 23 q. 1 c. Quid culpatur) who states: "a
sibi iubetur, vel non esse contra Dei preceptum, certum just man, even if he perhaps performs military service
est, vel utrum sit, certum non est, ita, ut fortasse reum under a king who is a sacrilegious individual, can wage
faciat regem iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem war with rectitude at the latter's command, maintaining
militem ostendat ordo serviendi". Ex quibus verbis discipline for the sake of peace, if it is certain that the
colligitur quod miles regi sacrilego in dubiis obedire order he receives is not against God's precept, or if it is
tenetur. Ergo multo magis in dubiis est obediendum not certain that this order is against God's precept, so that
summo pontifici. Ex quo concluditur quod dubitantes even if the injustice of a command would perhaps make
talem appellationem vel recusationem esse legitimam si the king guilty, the maintenance of discipline would on
papa non defert ei et aliis mandat ne deferant, ipsi ei the other hand show the soldier to be innocent". [col.
obedire debent.
893] We gather from these words that a soldier is
obligated to obey a sacrilegious monarch in doubtful
matters. Therefore all the more must one obey the
supreme pontiff in doubtful matters. From which one
355

