from these texts that a wrong against God must be
avenged more strongly than a wrong against our person,
and thus if it is permitted to appeal from the sentence of
a lesser judge which causes one a personal harm, all the
more is it permitted to appeal from a sentence which
does wrong to God, and such is a papal sentence which
condemns the catholic faith.
Capitulum 32
Chapter 32
Discipulus: Hec ultima ratio tripliciter videtur deficere. Student: This last reason seems to fail in three respects.
Primo quia auctoritates non loquuntur de omnibus Firstly, because the cited authorities do not refer to all
christianis, sed tantummodo de prelatis qui debent Dei Christians but only to the prelates who have the duty to
iniuriam vindicare. Secundo quia si concluderet, punish a wrong done to God. Secondly, because if the
probaretur per illam quod necesse esset cuilibet reason were conclusive it would prove that it was
catholico a tali sententia appellare, sicut quilibet necessary for any catholic to appeal from such a
catholicus tenetur iniuriam Dei vindicare. Tertio quia ex sentence, just as any catholic is bound to punish a wrong
ipsa
sequeretur
quod
quilibet
criminosus due to God. Thirdly, because it would follow therefrom
excommunicatus et infamis posset a tali sententia that any criminal, excommunicated and disgraced
appellare sicut quilibet criminosus excommunicatus et individual might appeal from such a sentence, just as any
infamis potest propriam prosequi iniuriam, immo etiam criminal, excommunicated and disgraced individual may
inimicus posset a tali pape sententie appellare, quia seek redress for personal injury received, indeed even an
inimicus potest prosequi iniuriam propriam, ergo multo enemy might appeal from such a papal sentence, because
magis iniuriam illatam Deo si illa ratio procedit. Hec an enemy may seek redress for personal injury received,
sunt que illam rationem impedire videntur. Tu autem dic therefore all the more might he seek redress for a wrong
qualiter potest ad ipsa responderi.
committed against God, if the reason holds. I ask you
therefore to state how one may reply to these objections.
Magister: Ad primam istarum posset aliquis dicere Master: To the first one someone might respond that the
quod auctoritates superius allegate insinuant iniuriam authorities cited above do suggest that a wrong done to
Dei esse vindicandam a prelatis. Etiam manifestant God must be punished by prelates. They also show that
quod omnes catholici quantum licet et expedit pro gradu all catholics have the duty to react towards a wrong
et officio uniuscuiusque debent iniurie illate Deo committed against God to the extent that this is
occurrere. Et ideo appellare ab iniqua sententia non permitted by and pertinent to the status and office of
solum conveniat prelatis sed etiam subditis. Eo enim every single individual. And therefore to appeal from an
ipso quod prelati debent iniuriam Dei vindicare, licebit unjust sentence is not only pertinent to prelates but also
subditis (si plus non possunt vel statui eorum non to subjects. For by the very fact that spiritual leaders
competit) a tali sententia appellare, quia minus est must punish a wrong committed against God it would be
appellare quam vindictam exercere. Si ergo prelati permitted to subjects (assuming they can do no more or
debent vindictam exercere in illos qui iniuriantur Deo that doing more is incompatible with their status) to
licebit eis a tali sententia appellare. Ad secundam dicitur appeal from such a sentence, because it is a lesser matter
quod per dictam rationem non probatur quod aliquis to appeal than to inflict punishment. Therefore if prelates
teneatur a tali sententia appellare nisi quando non potest must inflict punishment upon those who commit a wrong
convenienter aliter quam appellando tali inique sententie against God, it would be permitted to subjects to appeal
obviare, et in hoc casu conceditur quod necesse est a tali from the sentence we are discussing. The response to the
sententia appellare. Nec intendunt illi qui dicunt non second objection is that the reason in question does not
esse necesse appellare a tali iniqua sententia quod in prove that someone is bound to appeal from such a
nullo casu sit necesse appellare, sed non est regulariter sentence except when he cannot conveniently resist this
necesse, quia quando regulariter est necesse appellare ab injustice by any means other than an appeal, in which
aliqua iniqua sententia, hoc est ne talis sententia transeat case it is conceded that an appeal from such a sentence is
in rem iudicatam. Ob hanc autem causam nunquam est necessary. And the theorists who say that it is not
necesse appellare a sententia lata contra fidem. Sed ob necessary to appeal from such an unjust sentence do not
aliam causam potest alicui incumbere necessitas wish to imply that there is no situation where an appeal
appellandi, puta si aliter propter malitiam vel is necessary, but that it is not necessary to do this as a
negligentiam vel imperitiam aliorum vel ob aliam rule, because when a regular appeal from some unjust
causam non posset talem iniquam sententiam sentence is necessary this is done so as to prevent such a
impugnare. Ad tertiam potest dici quod si non esset sentence from becoming legally conclusive. Indeed for
alius quam criminosus et infamis qui vellet causam fidei this very motive it is never necessary to appeal from a
prosequi contra papam pronuntiantem fidem christianam sentence rendered against the faith. But another
esse falsam, criminosis et infamibus liceret a tali circumstance might necessarily impose upon someone a
sententia appellare et prosequi suam appellationem, duty to appeal, for instance, if it were not otherwise
essentque tales audiendi. Idemque posset dici de possible to oppose such an unjust sentence because of
324

