salvari possit licet non fuerit Cardinalis.

be saved although it is possible to be saved even if
one is not a cardinal.

Ad sextam dicitur quod totum collegium cardinalium,
eciam si non essent nisi duo, non posset errare contra
bonos mores quia preservaretur a Deo.

To the sixth it is said that the whole college of
cardinals, even if there were only two of them, could
not err against good morals because it would be kept
safe by God.

Ad septimam dicitur quod sicut aliquando ecclesia
preservatur circa maiora et non circa minora -congregacio enim fidelium preservatur a Deo ne fidei
catholice iacturam sustineat, quam tamen Deus patitur
multis pressuris et angustiis tribulari corporalibus -- ita
collegium cardinalium preservatur ne erret in fide, non
tamen preservatur ne erret in eleccione summi
pontificis.

To the seventh it is said that just as the church is
sometimes kept safe in major matters and not in
minor ones -- for the congregation of believers is
kept safe by God so that it does not sustain damage to
catholic faith, although God allows it be afflicted
with many bodily pressures and anxieties -- so the
college of cardinals is kept safe so that it does not err
in faith, yet it is not kept safe so that it does not err in
the choice of the highest pontiff.

Ad octavam dicitur quod nec ex sanctitate nec ex fidei
firmitate cardinalium maiori quam habuerunt apostoli
est quod collegium cardinalium errare non potest, sed
ex promissione Christi. Unde illud argumentum, si
valeret, concluderet quod omni tempore post apostolos
potuit congregacio fidelium errare contra fidem, quia in
congregacione fidelium post tempora apostolorum nec
maior sanctitas nec maior fidei firmitas quam in
apostolis fuit inventa.

To the eighth it is said that it is not from the cardinals
having greater sanctity or firmness of faith than the
apostles had that the college of cardinals can not err,
but from Christ's promise. So if that [eighth]
argument were valid it would lead to the conclusion
that at any time after the apostles the congregation of
believers has been able to err against faith, because
among the congregation of believers after the time of
the apostles there has not been found greater sanctity
or greater firmness of faith than the apostles had.

Ad nonam dicitur quod dignitas ecclesiastica non
sanctificat nec inobliquabilem in fide constituit aliquam
personam, tamen Christus preservat ab errore contra
fidem aliquod collegium habens aliquam spiritualem
dignitatem, quemadmodum religio Christiana nec
sanctificat nec inobliquabilem constituit aliquam
personam, Christus tamen preservat collegium
suscipiencium religionem Christianam ne erret contra
fidem.

To the ninth it is said that an ecclesiastical dignity
does not sanctify any person or make them unable to
turn aside from the faith; nevertheless Christ does
keep safe from error against faith any college having
some spiritual dignity, just as the christian religion
does not sanctify any person or make them unable to
turn aside, yet Christ keeps safe the college of those
receiving the christian religion so that it does not err
against faith.

Ad decimam dicitur dupliciter uno modo quod
collegium archiepiscoporum et episcoporum non potest
contra fidem errare, et isti concedunt quod preter
congregacionem fidelium sunt plura collegia
particularia que contra fidem errare non possunt, scilicet
collegium cardinalium et collegium episcoporum. Aliter
dicitur quod collegium cardinalium quantum ad aliqua
est eminencius collegio episcoporum licet quantum ad
aliqua sit inferius ipso et ideo licet cardinales valeant
eligi ad episcopatus poterit tamen collegium ipsorum
cardinalium esse confirmatum in fide.

There are two ways of answering the tenth. One way
is that the college of archbishops and bishops can not
err against faith; and they grant that there are many
particular colleges, apart from the congregation of
believers, which can not err against faith, for instance
the college of cardinals and the college of bishops. In
another way it is said that the college of cardinals is
more eminent than the college of bishops with
respect to some matters, although with respect to
others it is inferior to it, and therefore although
cardinals can be chosen for the episcopate yet the
college of those cardinals can be confirmed in faith.

Ad undecimam dicitur quod de una sola ecclesia
generali militante asseritur quod non potest contra
fidem errare. Cum hoc tamen stat quod sit aliqua
ecclesia particularis que non possit errare contra fidem,

To the eleventh it is said that of only one general
church militant is it affirmed that it can not err
against faith. Yet it is not inconsistent with this that
there is some particular church which can not err

200

