incorrigibilis probaretur.

the emperor ought not to depose him unless the pope
were proved to be incorrigible [John of Paris, ch. 13].
Discipulus: Modo opinionem istorum intelligo quamvis Student: Now I understand their point of view (though I
eam inter hereses reputem numerandam, de qua tecum would reckon it should be listed among the heresies) and
in tractatu De dogmatibus Io. 22-i prolixius disputabo. propose to debate this opinion with you at length in the
Nunc autem dic qualiter ad rationes et auctoritates pro treatise Concerning the doctrines of John XXII. And
assertione contraria isti respondent. De secundo vero now state the manner in which these opponents respond
modo ponendi nihil dicas ad presens.
to the arguments and authorities in favour of the contrary
assertion. Say nothing for the moment however about
the second formulation.
Magister: Ad primam negant minorem cum accipitur Master: Their response to the first argument is to deny
quod imperator est inferior papa et eius iurisdictioni the minor which holds that by Christ's dispensation, and
subiectus quantum ad iurisdictionem temporalem ex as to temporal jurisdiction, the emperor is inferior to the
ordinatione Christi, et ideo in huiusmodi papa non est pope and subject to his jurisdiction. In matters of this
iudex imperatoris licet forte aliquando fuerit iudex kind, therefore, the pope is not the judge of the emperor;
imperatoris in quantum commissarius vel delegatus although he could possibly at some moment have been
populi Romani.
the judge of the emperor as a trustee or delegate of the
Roman people.
Discipulus: Ista sunt verba mirabilia at inaudita nec ea Student: These words are astounding and unheard of,
intelligo, sed si potes fac me illa intelligere et tunc de nor do I understand them; but make me understand them
eis certius iudicabo.
if you can, and then I shall appraise them with greater
certainty.
Magister: Ut ea intelligas debes scire quod secundum Master: In order to understand these words you must
istos imperator et quilibet rex temporalis licet a Deo realize that in the view of these opponents the emperor
quodammodo mediate iurisdictionem suam habeat and any temporal king, even if he somehow holds his
temporalem, quia secundum Apostolum ad Romanos 13 temporal jurisdiction by divine mediation (for according
"non est potestas nisi a Deo", tamen immediate to the Apostle in Romans 13[:1] "there is no power but
iurisdictionem suam habet a populo, imperator a populo of God"), nevertheless holds his jurisdiction
Romano, rex Francie a populo suo, rex Castelle a immediately from the people [ Marsilius, I.ix.2; I.xv.2]:
populo suo et sic quilibet rex a populo suo habet the emperor from the Roman people, the king of France
iurisdictionem suam, nisi sit aliquis rex cuius populus from his people, the king of Castile from his people; and
alicui alteri sit subiectus qui possit populo dare regem thus every king has his jurisdiction from his people
quemadmodum imperatores quondam diversis populis unless there is a king whose people is subject to
reges dederunt quia illi populi imperatori et populo someone else who has authority to give the people a
Romano subiecti fuerunt. Imperator igitur suam king, as emperors once upon a time gave kings to
iurisdictionem a populo Romano obtinuit. Populus various peoples because these peoples were subject to
autem Romanus ex causa rationabili sicut imperatorem the emperor and to the Roman people. The emperor ,
instituit ita eum potuit destituere eiusque iurisdictionem therefore, obtained his jurisdiction from the Roman
minuere et augere. Ex quo sequitur quod populus people; but the Roman people just as it had appointed
Romanus ex causa rationabili potuit imperatorem in the emperor could for reasonable cause have removed
aliquo casu alterius cui committeret iurisdictioni him from office [ Marsilius, I.xv.2; I.xviii], and
subiicere, quare potuit pape causam imperatoris diminished or increased his jurisdiction [ Marsilius,
delegare, in quo casu papa tanquam delegatus seu I.xii.3]. It follows from this that the Roman people for
commissarius auctoritate populi Romani super reasonable cause could have in some case subjected the
imperatorem iurisdictionem potuit obtinere, quam emperor to the jurisdiction of another, to whom it would
iurisdictionem beatus Petrus a Christo non suscepit et have committed this jurisdiction ; the Roman people
ideo papa in quantum successor beati Petri eam minime could therefore have delegated the cause of the emperor
habet.
to the pope, in which case the pope as delegate or trustee
could have obtained jurisdiction over the emperor by
authority of the Roman people. This jurisdiction blessed
Peter did not receive from Christ, and thus the pope in
no way possesses it in his capacity as the successor of
blessed Peter.
Discipulus: Nunc verba predicta intelligo, quamvis ipsa Student: Now I understand the aforementioned words
putem erronea, et ideo ad rationes factas accede.
though I would believe them to be wrong. Proceed
therefore with the opponents' responses to the
arguments.
Magister: Propter diversas opiniones antequam narrem Master: Due to the variety of adversarial opinions it
quomodo ad rationes explicite respondetur oportet illas behooves me to express them before outlining how the
281

