Secunda racio est hec. Constitutus in officio per quod
necessario neque conferuntur neque augentur
necessario gracia et virtutes potest labi in hereticam
pravitatem, seu ante susceptum officium potuit heretica
pravitate fedari. Hec est nota quia sine gracia vel
virtute non potest aliquis viator a pravitate heretica
preservari qui prius poterat eandem pravitatem
incurrere nisi perderet usum racionis. Sed in
suscepcione papalis officii non necessario conferuntur
gracia et virtutes neque eciam necessario tunc
augentur. Ergo cum papa ante susceptum papale
officium potuerit pravitate heretica involvi sequitur
quod post eciam susceptum officium dictum, si non
perdiderit usum racionis, possit eadem labe fedari.

A second argument is this. Someone appointed to an
office through which grace and virtues are neither
necessarily conferred nor necessarily increased can
fall into heretical wickedness, or could have been
stained with heretical wickedness before he obtained
the office. This is well known, because without grace
or virtue no pilgrim who could previously have
incurred some heretical wickedness can be preserved
from that wickedness unless he were to lose the use of
reason. But grace and virtues are not necessarily
conferred when the papal office is obtained nor also
are they necessarily increased then. Therefore since
the pope was able to be involved in heretical
wickedness before obtaining the office of pope, it
follows that also after obtaining that office he can be
polluted by the same stain (if he does not lose the use
of reason).

Maior est manifesta, minor auctoritatibus et racione
probatur. Racione quidem: quia suscipiens papatus
officium poterit esse in peccato mortali; existenti
autem in peccato mortali gracia et virtutes minime
conferuntur nec eciam, stante peccato mortali, augentur
in ipso; ergo potest contingere quod in assumpto ad
papatum neque virtutes nec gracia augeantur neque
tunc eidem conferantur. Quod eciam multis sanctorum
testimoniis hoc videtur aperte probari. Beatus enim
Gregorius ut habetur dist. 40, c. Non loca ait, "Non
loca vel ordines creatori nostro nos proximos faciunt,
sed nos aut merita bona ei coniungunt aut mala
disiungunt." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod nulla
dignitas ecclesiastica absque bonis meritis facit Deo
proximos ad idem officium vel dignitatem assumptos.
Ex quo manifeste concluditur quod in suscepcione
papalis officii gracia et virtutes non necessario
conferuntur neque de necessitate augentur, cum absque
bonis meritis, immo cum meritis malis, possit quis
ambiciosus avarus aut alio crimine irretitus ad officium
papatus assumi.

The major [premise] is manifest; the minor is proved
by authorities and by reason. Certainly by reason,
because someone who obtains the papal office can be
in mortal sin; but grace and virtues are not conferred
on anyone who is in mortal sin, nor are they increased
in such a one while the mortal sin persists. It can
happen, therefore, that neither virtues nor grace will
be increased in someone raised to the papacy or will
be conferred on him then. This also seems to be
clearly provable from many writings of the saints.
For, as we find in dist. 40, c. Non loca [col.146],
blessed Gregory says, "It is not our position or our
orders that bring us close to our creator but it is our
good deserts that join us to him or our bad ones that
separate us from him." By these words we are given
to understand that without good deserts no
ecclesiastical dignity brings closer to God those being
raised to that office or dignity. From this we clearly
conclude that grace and virtues are not conferred
necessarily nor by necessity increased with the
obtaining of the office of pope, since without good
deserts - in fact with bad deserts - it is possible for
someone ambitious, greedy or involved in some other
wrong to be appointed to the office of the papacy.

Hinc eciam idem Gregorius ut habetur dist. predicta c.
Nos qui ait, "Nos qui presumus non ex locorum vel
generis dignitate sed morum nobilitate innotescere
debemus nec urbium claritate sed fidei puritate"; et
beatus Ambrosius ut habetur eadem dist. c. Illud ait,
"Illud adverte quod extra paradisum vir factus est
mulier intra paradisum ut advertas quod non loci non
generis nobilitate sed virtute unusquisque sibi
comparat." Et beatus Hieronimus ut habetur dist.
prefata c. Non est facile ait, "Non est facile stare in
loco Petri et Pauli, scilicet tenere cathedram cum
Christo regnancium, quia hinc dicitur non sanctorum
filii sunt qui tenent loca sanctorum sed qui exercent
opera eorum.' Et Iohannes Chrysostomus ut legitur
eadem dist. c. Multi ait, "Non facit cathedra sacerdotem

So as we find in c. Nos qui of the same distinction
[col.145], Gregory also says, "We who are in charge
should be known not for the dignity of our position or
our family but for the nobility of our way of life, not
for the fame of our cities but for the purity of our
faith." And in c. Illud of the same distinction blessed
Ambrose says[col.147], "So that you might notice that
anyone at all judges themselves not by the nobility of
their position or of their family but by their virtue,
take note of the fact that man was made outside
paradise but woman within." And as we find in the
same distinction c. Non est facile, blessed Jerome says
[col.145], "It is not easy to stand in the place of Peter
and Paul, that is to hold the see of those reigning with
Christ; for this reason it is said that the children of the

174

