sanitatis et inductivum infirmitatis. Sic qui debet uti someone should not utilize medicine at all times for the
appellatione debet uti ipsa ut ab oppressione relevetur purpose of achieving health, because such constant use
vel ne irrationabiliter opprimatur. Non tamen necesse would frequently prevent one from achieving health and
est semper uti appellationis remedio si alio modo ab would rather cause illness. Similarly, he who must use
oppressione quis valeat relevari. Et ideo ab iniqua the appeal process must use it so as to be liberated from
sententia pape pronuntiantis fidem christianam esse harm or to prevent his being unreasonably harmed. But it
falsam non est absolute necesse appellare, licet in casu is not necessary to always utilize the appeal remedy if
quando oppressus aliter relevari non posset necesse someone is capable of being liberated from harm in
esset appellare.
another way. And therefore it is not absolutely necessary
to appeal from the unjust sentence of a pope who
proclaims the Christian faith to be false, although
occasionally it would be necessary to appeal if the
person harmed could not find relief in some other way.
Capitulum 31
Chapter 31
Discipulus: Postquam disseruisti quantum volui an ille, Student: After you had discussed as much as I wanted
contra quem papa diffinitivam ferret sententiam quod whether someone against whom the pope were to render
lex christiana est falsa, posset appellare a tali iniqua a sentence that the Christian law is false might appeal
sententia, et ibidem recitasti quod licet cuilibet from this unjust sentence, you had reported in that
christiano a tali sententia appellare, sed motiva illius context that it was permitted to any Christian to appeal
assertionis minime adduxisti, ideo rogo ut eandem from such a judgement, but you did not provide reasons
assertionem fulcire nitaris.
for the assertion. Therefore I request that you endeavour
to strengthen this assertion.
Magister: Quod cuilibet christiano a tali sententia licet Master: One may prove in many ways, it seems, that a
appellare videtur multis modis posse probari. Primo sic. Christian is permitted to appeal from such a judgement.
A sententia lata contra alium licet cuilibet appellare cui Here is the first reason. Anyone is permitted to appeal
per talem sententiam fit preiudicium manifestum (Extra, from a judgement rendered against someone else if that
De sententia et re iudicata, c. Cum super ). Sed per judgement generates an obvious prejudice to the former
sententiam pape quod lex christiana est falsa latam (Extra, De sententia et re iudicata, c. Cum super). [col.
contra alium fit cuilibet christiano preiudicium 401] But a papal sentence that the Christian law is false
manifestum, quia cum, teste Apostolo, una sit fides which is rendered against another generates an obvious
omnium, sententia lata contra fidem est in preiudicium prejudice to every Christian, because ( the Apostle
cuiuslibet christiani. Ergo a tali sententia lata contra witnessing that faith is common to all) [Ephesians 4:5-6]
alium licet cuilibet christiano appellare.
a sentence rendered against the faith prejudices every
Christian. Therefore it is permitted to any Christian to
appeal from this sentence rendered against someone else.
Discipulus: Non videtur quod per talem sententiam aliis Student: It does not appear that a prejudice is generated
preiudicium generetur, quia "res inter alios acta aliis non to others by such a sentence, since a matter in legal
nocet" in multis casibus secundum quod glossa notat dispute between specific individuals does no harm to the
Extra, De fide instrumentorum, c. Inter dilectos. Igitur rest (Extra, De fide instrumentorum, c. Inter dilectos).
sententia iniqua contra fidem lata contra aliquem aliis [col. 348] Therefore an unjust sentence against the faith
catholicis non nocet et per consequens non interest which is rendered against someone does no harm to the
eorum a tali sententia appellare.
other catholics, and consequently it is not their concern
to appeal from such a sentence.
Magister: Respondetur quod illa regula: res inter alios Master: The answer is that the rule 'a matter in legal
acta aliis non nocet "fallit in multis casibus" secundum dispute between specific individuals does no harm to the
quod notat glossa Extra, De sententia et re iudicata, c. rest' "fails in many cases", [col. 903] according to a note
Quamvis. Nocet enim ut ibidem dicit glossa "cum cause in the gloss to Extra, De sententia et re iudicata, c.
sunt connexe", et per consequens multo magis cum Quamvis. [col. 409] For there is harm done, as the gloss
causa est una et eadem cuiusmodi est causa fidei que states in this context, "when cases are linked", [col. 903]
omnibus est communis. Et ideo cum fides catholica and consequently all the more when a cause is one and
condempnatur,
omnibus
catholicis
preiudicium the same as is the cause of faith, which is common to all.
generatur, quare omnibus licet si voluerint a tali Thus when the catholic faith is condemned a prejudice is
sententia appellare.
generated to all catholics, and therefore it is permitted to
them all, if they wish, to appeal from such a sentence.
Discipulus: Alia motiva adducas.
Student: Advance some other reasons.
Magister: Secundo sic arguitur. Cuilibet licet Master: The second argument is as follows. Everyone is
appellando et defendendo suam prosequi iniuriam. Sed permitted, by appealing and defending one's self in
per talem iniquam sententiam pape cuilibet catholico fit court, to pursue a cause for harm done. But such an
iniuria. Igitur cuilibet licet a tali sententia appellare. unjust papal sentence does harm to every catholic.
322

