pope denied this, Jerome would have held him to be the
worst of heretics.
Discipulus: Quid ergo supposuit beatus Hieronymus Student: What, then, did Jerome submit to papal
correctioni pape.
correction.
Magister: Respondetur quod beatus Hieronymus Master: The answer is that Jerome submitted nothing
absolute nichil supposuit correctioni pape, sed absolutely (but only conditionally) to the correction of
conditionaliter tantum, quod verba eius aperte declarant the pope, which his words openly declare when he
cum dicit: "in qua si minus perite aut parum caute forte states: "should we have affirmed something in our
aliquid positum est emendari cupimus a te etc.," que presentation thereof which is unlearned or perhaps
verba, sicut de se patet, conditionalia sunt.
lacking in caution, we desire to be corrected by you
etc." It is inherently obvious that these words are
conditional.
Discipulus: Saltem ex forma verborum apparet quod Student: It appears at least from the form of the words
Hieronymus fidem suam quam didicerat in ecclesia that Jerome conditionally submitted his faith, which he
conditionaliter supposuit correctioni pape. Quia primo had learned in the church, to the correction of the pope.
dicit: "hec est fides, papa beatissime, quam in catholica For he initially states: "this is the faith, most holy pope,
ecclesia didicimus", et postea subiungit: "in qua si minus which we have learned in the church", and afterwards he
etc."
adds; "should we have affirmed etc."
Magister: Respondetur quod quamvis absque periculo Master: The answer is that although Jerome could have
Hieronymus potuerit conditionaliter fidem suam conditionally submitted his faith to the correction of the
supponere correctioni pape, quia conditionalis nichil pope without danger (for a conditional statement affirms
ponit, (unde et hec conditionalis vera est: "si in nothing; hence this conditional statement is true: "if
evangelio aliquod falsum asseritur, corrigendum est") something false is asserted in the Gospel it must be
tamen beatus Hieronymus in verbis premissis non corrected"), nevertheless blessed Jerome had not
intendebat fidem suam supponere correctioni pape, sed intended in the cited words to submit his faith to the
expositionem
suam
circa
fidem
intendebat correction of the pope, but had intended to conditionally
conditionaliter supponere correctioni pape, ut iste sit submit his exposition concerning the faith to the
sensus verborum suorum: "in qua", id est circa quam, correction of the pope. Therefore his words should be
scilicet fidem, exponendam et explanandam, "si minus interpreted as follows: "in our presentation thereof", that
perite aut parum caute forte aliquid positum est, is, concerning its (namely the faith's) exposition and
emendari cupimus a te, etc." Quemadmodum si quis explanation, "should we have affirmed something which
postillator evangelii diceret; "hoc est evangelium, in quo is unlearned, or lacking in caution, we desire to be
si aliquid minus bene dixi, paratus sum corrigere".
corrected by you etc." This is similar to a commentator
of the Gospel saying: "this is the gospel; should I have
stated something badly in my exposition, I stand ready
to be corrected".
Capitulum 72
Chapter 72
Discipulus: Si de predicto modo circa alias prerogativas Student: If you offer similarly expanded comments
quibus preeminere debet impugnator idoneus pape concerning the other prerogatives which the qualified
heretici dilatares, multis lectoribus operis huius opponent of a heretic pope must possess in pre-eminent
fastidium generares, ideo alias succincte percurras.
fashion, you would arouse boredom in many readers of
this work, therefore be brief in your description of other
prerogatives.
Magister: Alie prerogative impugnatoris pape heretici Master: Here is a listing of other prerogatives of the
assignantur.
Quarum
alique
sunt
communes heretic pope's opponent. Some of these are common to
impugnantibus corporaliter et spiritualiter pape heretici, both spiritual and physical opponents of a heretic pope,
alique vero sunt proprie impugnantibus spiritualiter while others are proper to those who oppose this pope
papam hereticum. Oportet eos qui corporaliter vel spiritually. It is appropriate that the persons directing
spiritualiter papam hereticum magnam sequelam and heading others in physical or spiritual opposition to
habentem satagunt impugnare, tanquam directores et a heretic pope who has a large following, should be
capita aliorum, novarum viarum existere inventivos. discoverers of new and fresh methods of action. For just
Quia sicut, teste beato Augustino ad Bonifatium, ut as, witness blessed Augustine writing to Boniface (as
legitur dis. 50 cap. Ut constitueretur, cogunt multas we read in dis. 50 c. Ut constitueretur), the experience
invenire medicinas multorum experimenta morborum, of many diseases promotes the discovery of many cures,
ita casus novi et extranei emergentes cogunt industrios so does the emergence of new and unusual problems
ad occurrendum vias novas et extraneas invenire. Cum prompt diligent individuals to intensify the discovery of
ergo sit valde extraneum atque rarum quod papa sit new and unusual solutions. Therefore, since it is quite
pravitate infectus heretica, ad ipsum viriliter unusual and rare for the pope to become infected with
impugnandum oportet vias extraneas cogitare, presertim heretical wickedness, it is appropriate to discover
485

