eos deteriores efficerent. In hoc enim casu non debet judicial authority, and whose secret correction, far from
aliquis iurisdictionem nullatenus habens corrigere benefiting delinquents, would make the latter even
delinquentes. Consimiliter ubi aliquis attemptando worse. Indeed in such a situation someone not
defendere patientes iniuriam ipsos defendere non posset possessing jurisdiction must refrain from correcting
et ad deteriora inferentes iniuriam provocaret, deberet delinquents. Similarly, where someone by attempting to
defensionem subtrahere. Sed sicut subditi peccant defend those suffering harm would not in fact be able to
mortaliter si timore temporalia aut humanum favorem defend them successfully, and would provoke the
perdendi aut propter personale periculum evitandum vel perpetrators of the harm into committing even worse
ob aliquod terrenum habendum, socios vel prelatos cum deeds, he would have the duty to refrain from providing
probabiliter putant quod possunt eos a peccato retrahere, defense. And yet just as subjects sin mortally (if they
negligunt secreto corrigere, ita peccant mortaliter qui neglect to secretly correct partners or prelates when they
cum convenienter possunt, ex timore vel cupiditate think it probable that they might influence these against
defensionem in periculis constitutis vel patientibus the commission of evil) for fear of losing temporal
iniuriam non impendunt.
possessions or human favour, or so as to avoid personal
danger or to acquire some earthly possession, so likewise
those sin mortally who (because of fear or desire for
gain) do not provide defense when they conveniently can
to people threatened by dangers or suffering harm.
Discipulus: Estne aliquis doctor modernus qui teneat Student: Is there some modern doctor who holds that
quod non corrigentes in casu predicto peccantes peccent those who fail to correct sinners in the situation we are
mortaliter.
discussing commit a mortal sin.
Magister: Thomas de Aquino hoc sentit expresse. Dicit Master: This is the express belief of Thomas Aquinas.
enim 2a 2e, q. 33, articulo 2: "pretermittitur fraterna For he states in 2a 2e q. 33 article 2 that: "it is a sin to
correctio cum peccato mortali quando scilicet refrain from fraternal correction when, namely 'one fears
'formidatur.. iudicium vulgi et carnis excrutiatio vel mass opinion and the torture or destruction of one's
peremptio', dum tamen hec ita dominentur in animo flesh', [Augustine, De Civitate Dei, I, 9 (PL 41, col. 22)]
quod fraterne caritati preponantur. Et hoc videtur if these fears are so dominant in one's mind that they are
contingere quando aliquis presumit de aliquo placed ahead of brotherly love. And this appears to be
delinquente probabiliter quod posset eum a peccato the case when someone surmises with probability that he
retrahere, et tamen propter timorem vel cupiditatem can restrain some delinquent from the commission of a
pretermittit". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod etiam pro sin, and yet refrains from doing so because of fear or
morte vitanda non debet quis dimittere corrigere desire for gain". [Summa Theologie II-II, 33, 2, Ad
delinquentem si probabiliter credit quod potest eum per primum] One gathers from these words that a person
secretam correctionem retrahere a peccato. Ex quo must not refrain from correcting a delinquent even in
concluditur quod quilibet catholicus debet si potest order to avoid death, if the person has a probable belief
corrigere inferentem iniuriam, et per consequens that he can restrain the subject from sin by secret
defendere iniuriam patientem.
correction. From which one concludes that every
catholic must correct a perpetrator of harm if he can, and
thus that every catholic must defend someone who
suffers harm.
Discipulus: Quid dicitur ad hoc quod accepi in illa Student: What is the answer to my assumption in this
obiectione, videlicet, cuius est defendere iniuriam objection, namely that he who must defend one who
patientem eius est reprimere, et per consequens plectere suffers harm has the duty to prevent the harm and thus to
iniuriam inferentem.
punish the perpetrator thereof.
Magister: Ista negatur tanquam falsa, quia ad plures Master: This assumption is rejected as false. For it is the
pertinet defensio patientium et in periculis positorum, ad business of many to defend suffering and endangered
quos tamen, quamvis pertineat reprimere iniuriantes individuals and yet, even if these defenders may restrain
cum moderamine inculpate tutele ad eos tamen non harm doers by implementing blameless protection, it
spectat plectere iniuriam facientes, quemadmodum does not pertain to them to punish the harm doers. In the
cuilibet licet vim vi repellere cum moderamine inculpate same way, everyone is entitled to repel force with force
tutele (dis. 1 Ius naturale) ad quem tamen non semper by implementing blameless protection (dis. 1 Ius
pertinet illatam iniuriam vindicare.
naturale), [col. 2] but it does not always pertain to
everyone to inflict punishment for harm done.
Discipulus: Dic ad secundam obiectionem.
Student: Respond to the second objection.
Magister: Ad illam potest dici quod quamvis videns Master: The response to this might be, that although one
clericum verberari non incurrat excommunicationis who sees a clerk being battered does not incur the
sententiam si ipsum, quamvis posit, non defendat, tamen penalty of excommunication if he does not defend him
peccat mortaliter si ipsum non defendit cum possit, quod though he could, he nevertheless commits a mortal sin if
non tantum habet veritatem de clerico verberato sed he does not defend the clerk when able to; which is true
344

