and so he who forces another pertinaciously to defend
a heresy is known pertinaciously to defend that heresy
himself.
Quinta ratio est haec. Participantes criminosis in
crimine eodem crimine involvuntur; sed qui cogit alios
haeresim pertinaciter defensare participat in crimine
haeresim pertinaciter defensanti quia impendit ei
auxilium et favorem; ergo talis est pertinax
reputandus.

The fifth argument is this. Those who share in a crime
with criminals are caught up in the same crime; but he
who forces others pertinaciously to defend a heresy
shares in the crime with the one pertinaciously
defending the heresy because he grants him help and
support; such a person should be regarded, therefore,
as pertinacious.

Sexta ratio est haec. Qui non est paratus corrigi de
haeresi quam tenet est pertinax reputandus; sed qui
cogit alios ad suam haeresim pertinaciter defendendam
non est paratus corrigi; ergo pertinax est censendus.

[See Significant Variants, para. 19.] A sixth argument
is this. He who is not ready to be corrected of a heresy
he holds should be regarded as pertinacious; but he
who forces others pertinaciously to defend his heresy
is not ready to be corrected; he should, therefore, be
considered pertinacious.

Septima ratio est haec. Qui cogit alios ad haeresim
pertinaciter defendendam vult eandem haeresim
irrevocabiliter defensari et teneri; talis autem est
pertinax; ergo, etc.

A seventh argument is this. He who forces others to
defend a heresy pertinaciously wants that heresy to be
defended and held irrevocably; such a person is
pertinacious, however; therefore, etc.

Discipulus Istae rationes procedunt tantummodo de
cogente alios haeresim suam pertinaciter defensare,
sed contingit haeresim defensare absque pertinacia.
Ergo licet aliquis cogat alios poenis, minis, praeceptis
et iuramentis haeresim aliquam defensare, dummodo
non cogat eos pertinaciter defensare, non est pertinax
nec haereticus reputandus. Quod videtur posse probari
tali ratione. Qui cogit alium et non ad peccatum
mortale non committit peccatum mortale. Et per
consequens non est propter talem coactionem pertinax
et haereticus reputandus, cum omnis haereticus in
peccato mortali existat. Sed defensare haeresim non
est semper peccatum mortale, licet defendere haeresim
pertinaciter sit peccatum mortale. Ergo propter talem
coactionem non est quis pertinax et haereticus
reputandus.

[See Significant Variants, para. 20.] Student Those
arguments are valid only of someone forcing others
pertinaciously to defend his heresy, but it is possible to
defend a heresy without pertinacity. Even if someone
forces others by punishments, threats, commands and
oaths to defend some heresy, therefore, he should not
be regarded as pertinacious or a heretic as long as he
does not force them to defend it pertinaciously. This
seems provable by the following argument. He who
forces another, but not to a mortal sin, does not
commit a mortal sin; and, as a consequence, he should
not be regarded as pertinacious and a heretic,
consequently, on account of this forcing, since every
heretic is in mortal sin. But it is not always a mortal
sin to defend a heresy, although it is a mortal sin to
defend a heresy pertinaciously. No one should be
regarded as pertinacious and a heretic, therefore, on
account of such forcing.

Magister Ad hoc respondetur quod licet posset quis
haeresim absque pertinacia defensare, tamen cogens
alium absolute haeresim defensare quantum in se est
cogit ipsam haeresim pertinaciter defendere, sicut qui
cogit alium iurare quod aliquam assertionem quae est
haeretica irrevocabiliter et in perpetuum defensabit
quantum in eo est cogit ipsam eandem assertionem
pertinaciter defensare, licet in potestate ipsius tali
modo coacti sit postea eandem haeresim minime
defensare, et ideo talis cogens debet reputari pertinax
haeresis defensator, licet coacti iurare nolint postea
eandem heresim pertinaciter defensare sed volunt
venire contra illicitum iuramentum. Cum vero dicis
quod qui cogit alium et non ad peccatum mortale non

Master The reply to this is that although someone
could defend a heresy without pertinacity yet, if he
forces another to defend a heresy unrestrictedly, then
as far as in him lies he forces that person to defend that
heresy pertinaciously, just as he who forces another to
swear that he will defend irrevocably and forever some
assertion which is heretical forces him as much as he
can to defend that assertion pertinaciously even if it is
in the power of the one who is so forced not to defend
the heresy afterwards. The one so forcing, therefore,
ought to be regarded as a pertinacious defender of
heresy even if those forced to swear refuse later on to
defend that heresy pertinaciously but want to go
against their illicit oath. But when you say that he who

148

