inter pertinaces et hereticos computandi.

pertinacious and heretical. Everyone agreeing with
him, therefore, should also be numbered among the
pertinacious and heretical.

Discipulus Ista ratio pro isto nunc sufficiat. Ideo dic Student That argument will be enough for that
alium modum de pertinacia convincendi.
[position] for the moment. Describe, therefore, another
way of convicting of pertinacity.

Magister Decimonono est quis pertinax reputandus si,
inferior existens summo pontifice, aliquam assertionem
hereticam per sententiam diffinitivam determinat esse
tenendam, iniungens aliis et imponens quod ipsam
sentiant et reputent esse catholicam. Quicumque etiam
tali determinationi consenserit est pertinax et hereticus
censendus. Hoc ex precedentibus satis apparet, quia, si
papa taliter determinans et sibi consentientes sunt
pertinaces et heretici reputandi, multo magis inferior
papa taliter determinans officium usurpando papale et
sibi consentientes sunt pertinaces et heretici iudicandi.

Master Someone should be regarded as pertinacious in
a nineteenth way if, being less than the pope, he
prescribes in a definitive statement that some heretical
assertion should be held, enjoining and imposing it on
others that they should think of it and regard it as
catholic. Whoever agrees with such a prescription
should also be considered pertinacious and heretical.
This is clear enough from what was said above because
if a pope who prescribes in this way and those who
agree with him should be regarded as pertinacious and
heretical, it is much more the case that one who is less
than the pope and issues such a prescription, thus
usurping the papal office, and those who agree with
him should be judged to be pertinacious and heretical.

CAPITULUM 34.

Chapter 34.

Discipulus Describe alium modum errantem de Student Describe another way of convicting an errant
pertinacia convincendi.
of pertinacity.

Magister Vicesimo potest de pertinacia quis convinci si
potestatem habens pravitati heretice non resistit. Hoc
per sacros canones multipliciter videtur posse probari.
Ait enim Innocentius papa, ut habetur dist. 83. c. Error:
"Error cui non resistitur approbatur." Qui autem
errorem approbat videtur pertinax iudicandus. Ergo qui
errori non resistit si potest pertinax est censendus. Item
Leo papa, ut habetur Extra, De haereticis, c. Qui alios,
ait, "Qui alios cum potest ab errore non revocat seipsum
errare demonstrat." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi
quod qui potest haereticos ab errore revocare et non
revocat est inter haereticos computandus et per
consequens pertinax est censendus. Item Iohannes papa,
ut habetur dist. 80 c. Facientis, ait, "Facientis
proculdubio culpam habet qui quod potest corrigere
negligit emendare." Qui itaque pertinaces haereticos
quos potest corrigere negligit emendare pertinacium
haereticorum culpam habet et per consequens inter
pertinaces haereticos est habendus.

163

Master Someone can be convicted of pertinacity in a
twentieth way if he does not resist heretical wickedness
though he has the power to do so. This seems to be
provable in many ways by the sacred canons. For, as
we find in dist 83. c.[3] error, Pope Innocent [III] says:
"An error which is not resisted is approved". [col.401]
It seems, however, that he who approves an error
should be judged to be pertinacious. He who does not
resist an error if he can do so, therefore, should be
considered pertinacious. Again, as we find in Extra, De
hereticis. c.[2] Qui alios, Pope Leo says: "He who does
not recall others from error when he can do so shows
that he errs himself." [col.1669] From these words we
are given to understand that he who can recall heretics
from error and does not do so should be numbered
among the heretics and, consequently, should be
considered pertinacious. Pope John too, as we find in
dist. 86. c.[3] facientis, says: "He who neglects to free
from error what he can correct has without doubt the
fault of the one who acts." [col.408] And so he who
neglects to free from error pertinacious heretics whom
he can correct has the fault of pertinacious heretics and
should be held, as a consequence, to be among the
pertinacious heretics.

