persecucione facta per Titum et Vespasianum non
debent intelligi, quod manifeste videtur posse probari.
Primo quia tribulacio facta per diluvium, quando in
universo mundo 8 scilicet anime tantummodo
salvabantur, erat multo maior tribulacione que facta est
per Titum et Vespasianum, eo quod multe anime tunc
salvate fuerunt.

tribulation," etc., taken literally, should not be
understood of the persecution undertaken by Titus
and Vespasian. This seems to be obviously provable,
firstly because the suffering caused by the flood, that
is when there were only eight souls saved in the
whole world, was much greater than the suffering
caused by Titus and Vespasian since then there were
many souls saved.

Discipulus Verba Christi predicta non intelliguntur de
tribulacione generali universorum mortalium, qualis fuit
illa que facta fuit per diluvium, sed de tribulacione
particulari et speciali Iudeorum, quorum non fuit maior
quam illa que facta fuit per Romanos.

Student: Those words of Christ are not meant of the
general suffering of all mortals, which was the kind
brought about by the flood, but of the particular and
special suffering of the Jews, of which there was
none greater than that brought about by the Romans.

Magister Hec responsio potest taliter impugnari.
Christus enim ibidem non loquitur de tribulacione
speciali Iudeorum tantummodo, sed eciam loquitur de
tribulacione aliarum gencium et regnorum, cum
premittat ibidem dicens, "Consurget enim gens in
gentem et regnum in regnum," etc. Que verba de Iudea
tantummodo, que fuit unicum regnum, non possunt
intelligi. Verba ergo Christi cum dicit "Erit enim tunc
tribulacio magna," etc., de tribulacione Iudeorum quam
intulerunt Romani non debent intelligi. Intelliguntur
ergo vel de tribulacione generali cunctorum vivencium
vel de tribulacione speciali alicuius gentis vel aliquarum
gencium determinatarum. Non possunt intelligi de
tribulacione generali, quia illa que facta fuit per
diluvium maior fuit quam illa quam fecere Romani. Nec
possunt intelligi de tribulacione speciali gentis vel
gencium facta per Romanos, quia tribulacio
Sodomorum, in qua omnes perierunt, maior fuit quam
tribulacio per Romanos illata. Ergo verba Christi
predicta de tribulacione que facta fuit per Romanos non
debent intelligi.

Master: This reply can be attacked as follows. For
Christ is not talking there only about the particular
suffering of the Jews but he is talking also of the
suffering of other peoples and kingdoms, since just
before that he says [Matthew 24:7], "For nation shall
rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom,"
etc. These words can not be understood about Judea
only which was a single kingdom. So the words of
Christ when he says, "For there shall be then great
tribulation," etc., should not be understood of the
suffering inflicted on the Jews by the Romans. They
are understood, therefore, either of the general
suffering of all those who are alive or of the
particular suffering of some certain people or
peoples. They can not be understood of general
suffering, because that which was brought about by
the flood was greater than that which the Romans
brought about, nor can they be understood of the
particular suffering of a people or peoples brought
about by the Romans, because the suffering of the
people of Sodom, in which everyone perished, was
greater than the suffering inflicted by the Romans.
[See Significant Variants, para. 42.]The above words
of Christ, therefore, should not be understood of the
suffering that was brought about by the Romans.

Discipulus Potestne probari aliter quod verba Christi
prefata non debent intelligi de tribulacione facta per
Romanos tempore Titi et Vespasiani?

Student: Can it be proved in another way that those
words of Christ should not be understood of the
suffering brought about by the Romans in the time of
Titus and Vespasian?

Magister Aliter ostenditur sic. Tribulacio que erit
tempore antichristi maior erit quam tribulacio que fuit
facta per Romanos. Ergo de tribulacione facta per
Romanos non debent illa verba intelligi.

Master: It is shown in another way as follows. The
suffering that will occur at the time of anti-Christ will
be greater than the suffering that was brought about
by the Romans. Therefore those words should not be
understood as the suffering brought about by the
Romans.

Discipulus De qua tribulacione ergo debent intelligi?

Student: So, about what suffering should they be
understood?

262

