After the three preceding arguments he lays down another three taken from three notable points he says must be
attended to.
The first argument he lays down here is this. The blessed vision is to be rendered to the whole person, and not to
the separated soul; therefore the souls of the saints in heaven do not see God.
This argument is so to speak his more principal reason in favour of the abovementioned heresy; accordingly he
often repeats it and regards it as unbreakable. He puts it in his sermon beginning &#8220;Gaudete in
Domino&#8221; and in his tract beginning &#8220;Quaere utrum animae sanctorum&#8221;. He proves the
premise thus: the vision, which is the reward, will be rendered to him to whom it is promised; but the reward is
promised to the person and not to the separated soul; therefore etc. The minor is proved by three texts and one
argument.
But that argument rests upon an heretical foundation, namely that the reward is not promised except to the
person, and not to the soul. To make this clear
the truth must first be elucidated,
second the truth contrary to the abovementioned heretical foundation must be proved, and
third, running through the texts he quotes, the things that seem favourable to the contrary position must be
rejected.
Concerning the first, it must be known that it is Catholic truth that a reward that includes glory of soul and body
is promised only to the person, or the whole man composed of body and soul, and (in the normal course of
Providence) it will not be given before the day of general judgment; however, a reward that does not include
glory of soul and body but glory of soul only, namely the vision and enjoyment of God, is promised to the soul
before it resumes the body, and therefore that reward will be given, and is given, to many souls separated from
their bodies. However, it must be noted that glory of the soul is given and will be given to many souls before the
judgment, in respect of which it is not properly called a &#8220;reward&#8221;, because it is not called a
reward on account of their merits, but it can be called their reward promised on account of Christ&#8217;s
merit.
The second is that the vision of the divine essence has been promised to souls before the universal judgment.
The first is shown thus: Rest is promised to those deceased souls with nothing to be purged. This does not have
to be proved because it is known, and the inventor of the heresy in question would not deny it, since he expressly
grants in many places that the separated souls are at rest; but that rest is a certain kind of reward, which is given
to many souls on account of their merit; therefore some reward is promised to souls.
Again, to be in heaven, to see and rejoice concerning the humanity of Christ is a reward; for that will be given to
all the elect on account of Christ&#8217;s merit, and to some on account of their own merit together with
Christ&#8217;s merit; but it is promised to the souls of the saints; therefore some reward is promised to
separated souls. The Saviour manifestly suggests that the vision of God is promised to some souls, when he says,
John 7 [17:24]: &#8220;Father, I will that where I am, they also whom you have given me may be with me, so
that they may see my glory which you have given me&#8221; etc. These words suggest that Christ in preaching
promised that all who will be in heaven with Christ will see the glory of his deity. But separated souls are and
will be with Christ in heaven; therefore they see and will see the glory of Christ&#8217;s deity, and thus the
vision of God is promised to them.
But perhaps someone might say that Christ speaks of his glory according to his humanity, which the separated
souls see in heaven. But this evasion is a nullity, because here Christ speaks of the glory he had before the world
was; he says in the same place, speaking to the father [John 17:5]: &#8220;And now glorify me, Father, in your
presence, with the glory I had in your presence before the world existed.&#8221; But the glory Christ had before
the world existed is the glory of deity. Therefore those who are in heaven with Christ see the glory of his deity.
Let this suffice on this matter for the present, because it is not my intention in this work to disprove the principal
heresy through long-drawn-out means, but to reject the arguments here adduced. And therefore,
Third, I will run through the things he adduces. So when he says, &#8220;If we consider to whom that reward is
promised in sacred scripture, it is certain that it is to the whole person&#8221;, it is true that some reward is
promised to the whole person, namely that which includes glory of soul and body, and some is promised in
common to the person and to the separated soul, and these [rewards] are many. (For to be in heaven with Christ,
similarly to see and rejoice in the humanity of Christ, is a reward, which however is promised both to the whole
person and to the separated soul. Consorting with God and the angels is a reward promised to the whole person
and to the separated soul; for as Ambrose testifies, separated souls cross over to the joy of the angels, and also
the person after judgment will be led into the company of angels. Thus also the vision of God is a reward, and
yet it is promised to both the whole person and to the purified separated soul. And therefore, even if he were to
adduce thousands of texts to prove that the reward that is vision is promised to the whole person, just as easily it
would be said that he could not prove by them that the reward that is vision is not promised to purified souls--indeed living in heaven is promised both to the whole person and to the soul, just as is true of the vision that it is
promised to the whole person and to the separated soul.
523

