signification.
Discipulus De isto ponas exemplum si potes?

Disciple Would you give an example of that if you
can?

Magister Isidorus, ut habetur 24, q. 3, c. Quidam
autem, videtur ad hoc exemplum adducere
manifestum, aperte insinuans quod utraque istarum,
"Deus creat mala", "Deus non creat mala", est haeresis
condemnata. Unde et assertores utriusque haereticos
reputat manifestos, dicens, "Coliciani a quodam
Colicio nuncupati qui dicunt Deum non facere mala
contra illud quod scriptum est, 'Ego Dominus creans
malum'. Floriani a Floriano qui econtrario dicunt
Deum creasse mala contra hoc quod scriptum est,
'Fecit Deus omnia bona'." Ex his verbis colligitur quod
utraque istarum, "Deus creat mala", "Deus non creat
mala", est haeresis explicite condemnata. Et tamen
ista, "Deus creat mala", est assertio ambigua habens
aliquem sensum catholicum, scilicet istum Deus creat
mala poenae. Similiter ista, "Deus non creat mala",
habet sensum catholicum, scilicet istum Deus non
creat mala culpae.

Master Isidore seems to bring forward an obvious
example of this, as we find in 24, q. 3, c. Quidam
autem [col.1001], when he clearly implies that each of
[the assertions] "God creates evil", "God does not
create evil" has been condemned as a heresy. And thus
he regards those who assert each as manifest heretics,
saying: "The Coliciani, named after a certain Colicius,
say that God does not create evil, against the words 'I
the Lord who creates evil'. The Floriani, from
Florianus, say on the other hand that God created evil,
against the words 'God made everything good'." From
these words we gather that each of those [assertions]
"God creates evil", "God does not create evil" has
been explicitly condemned as a heresy. And yet the
[assertion] "God creates evil" is ambiguous and has a
catholic signification, namely that God creates the evil
of punishment; similarly that [assertion] "God does not
create evil" has a catholic signification, namely that
God does not create the evil of fault.

Discipulus Secundum ista videtur quod isti concedunt
quod aliquis absque heretica pravitate potest tenere
Deum creare mala culpae, quia dicunt quod aliquis
potest tenere assertionem ambiguam damnatam in eo
sensu in quo est damnata absque haeretica pravitate.

Disciple According to this they seem to grant that
someone can without heretical wickedness hold that
God creates the evil of fault, because they say that
someone can without heretical wickedness hold, in
that signification in which it was condemned, an
ambiguous assertion that has been condemned.

Magister Male arguis secundum istos, quia arguis a
particulari vel indifinita aequipollente particulari ad
singularem determinatam. Non enim dicunt quod
semper potest quis tenere assertionem ambiguam
damnatam in eo sensu in quo est damnata absque
haeretica pravitate, sed quandoque, quia, ut dicunt, si
tenetur quis scire sensum in quo est damnata assertio
esse haereticum, si tenet talem assertionem in tali
sensu, statim est haereticus iudicandus; si vero non
tenetur hoc scire, non est haereticus reputandus.

Master They say that you argue badly because you are
arguing from a particular, or an indefinite equivalent
to a particular, to a determinate singular. For they do
not say that it is always possible for someone without
heretical wickedness to hold, in that signification in
which it was condemned, an ambiguous assertion that
has been condemned, but sometimes, because, they
say, if someone is bound to know that the signification
in which an assertion has been condemned is heretical
and holds the assertion with that signification, he
should be judged immediately to be a heretic; if he is
not bound to know this, on the other hand, he should
not be regarded as a heretic.

Discipulus Quomodo est ergo procedendum circa
talem?

Disciple How, therefore, should action be taken about
such a person?

Magister Responsum est supra, quia, ut dicunt, non
sufficit ostendere tali quod assertio ambigua est
damnata, sed etiam oportet sibi aperte ostendere quod
talis sensus catholicae veritati repugnat.

Master This has been answered above because, they
say, it is not enough to show to such a person that the
ambiguous assertion has been condemned but it is
necessary also to show him clearly that such a
signification is contrary to catholic truth.

Capitulum 23

Chapter 23

141

