souls should first see God less clearly and afterwards be exalted to a clearer vision. Thus nothing among the
things that can belong to the same thing is higher than the highest, though God is higher than such a highest.
Taking "highest" in the third [actually the fourth -- has the third dropped out?] way, in that sense nothing is
higher than the highest in that species. Whence no black colour is higher than the most intense blackness, yet
there is some other colour that is higher than it.
Thus, therefore, it is clear that "highest" can be taken in many senses, and therefore the statement "Nothing is
higher than the highest" has various senses, of which one is true and another false.
But when, in the third way, he takes as a premise that "clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls", it is clear
from the above that this has various false senses, because it is false taking "highest" in the third way. It is also
false, taking "highest" in the fourth way, because the clear vision that the souls of the saints now have is not the
highest exaltation of souls, because it is not the clearest vision, which they will have, for they will have a clearer
after the judgment. But taking "highest" in the first way, in that sense it is not to the point. Taking it in the
second way, in this sense there are various opinions, as was said: some say that clear vision is more perfect than
love or enjoyment of God, and they would say that clear vision is the highest exaltation of the soul taking highest
in this sense. Others say that love or enjoyment is more perfect and higher than vision, and they would say that
vision is not the highest exaltation of souls, but enjoyment is.
And when, fourth, he says that "on the day of judgment God will exalt the saints and their souls", this is
conceded under the interpretation that the souls of the saints will then have clearer vision of God, and also joy in
the resurrection of glorious bodies and in the completion of the heavenly city of Jerusalem and in many other
things, and this will be the exaltation of souls. He will exalt the saints, i.e. their whole persons composed of body
and soul, because he will then give them perfect beatitude, which previously they did not have---indeed neither
did they previously see God, though their souls (and not themselves) now see God.
And when, fifth, he infers, "therefore until then they do not see God face-to-face", it must be said that his
inference is bad, if the preceding propositions are soundly understood. But if they are understood as he means
them (as has been said), in this way he infers an heretical conclusion from heretical premises. For he means that
clear vision is in such a way the highest exaltation of souls that a soul seeing God can acquire nothing further,
nor make progress in any way, nor desire anything it does not have. And this sense is erroneous, because it
would follow that Christ's soul would not have seen God from the instant of Christ's conception.
And when, sixth, he says, "Otherwise they would not be exalted then", this does not follow from the above, as
has been shown, because (as has been said), although the souls of the saints see God, nevertheless their souls will
be able to be exalted to a clearer vision, and the saints themselves, when they rise again in the body, will be able
to be exalted to a vision of the divine essence, to impassibility and to other gifts of body and soul.
And when he tries thus to prove the minor, namely that on the day of judgment God will exalt the saints and
their souls, by the statement [not found in text above] that "the souls of the saints are under the altar until the day
of judgment, and after that day they will see God face-to-face", it must be said that he misunderstand this text
from the book of the Apocalypse, for the reason the souls of the martyrs are said to be under the alter until the
day of judgment is not that they do not see the deity of Christ but only the humanity, as he falsely expounds the
text, but they are said to be under the altar for the reason that, hidden from us and from those who are in hell and
those in purgatory (many of them, at least) and shielded from all evil, they clearly see God and enjoy him.
Moreover, because in respect of this argument he tries to base himself on blessed Bernard [not found in text
above], he does not understand Bernard's words, because Bernard meant only that the saints according to their
souls are in the same place as Christ and see God, until those saints, whole and perfect according to both body
and soul, go forth, the number of the brethren being completed, and share in the kingdom, etc.
But perhaps someone would say, if the saints then share in the kingdom, and the kingdom is the vision of God,
therefore before that they will not have vision of God. To this it must be said that although sometimes clear
vision of God is called the kingdom, just as also the present Church is sometimes called the kingdom of God,
nevertheless consummate beatitude comprehending the beatitude of soul and body is sometimes called the
kingdom of God, and the saints will not receive that kingdom of God (in the normal course of providence [de
communi lege]) before the day of judgment---indeed (in the normal course of providence) as constituted of soul
and body they will not before then have the vision of God, but only their souls. And it was concerning this
kingdom, which is the glory of soul and body, that Bernard there speaks.
But still someone might ask, how, according to Bernard, will the saints be "above the altar" after the judgment,
since they will never be above Christ. This can be answered in two ways, in one that we do not read in divine
scripture that the souls of the saints after the judgment will be above the altar, and I do not remember reading
that Bernard says this. In another way it can be said that souls can be said to be above the altar after the judgment
for the reason that then they will not be hidden from any of the elect, but now they are said to be under the altar
because, seeing God, they are consoled and rejoice in God as being in some way hidden, for their glory is hidden
from many of the elect and also from those in hell, and therefore they can be said to be under the altar as being
hidden there.
520

