Dominus ad omnium apostolorum officium pertinere
voluit ut in beatissimo Petro, apostolorum omnium
summo, principaliter collocaret, ut ab ipso quasi quodam
capite dona sua velut in corpus omne diffunderet." Ex
quibus verbis patenter habetur quod beatus Petrus
institutus fuit caput apostolorum a Christo; ergo super
ipsos habuit primatum a Christo.

salvation, as has been written, [Romans 10:18]
'Their voice has gone out to all the earth, and their
words to the end of the world.' But the Lord wanted
the sacrament of this service to pertain to the office
of all the apostles so he located it principally in most
blessed Peter, the highest of all the apostles, so that
he might pour forth his gifts from him, as though
from the head to the whole body." We plainly learn
from these words that blessed Peter was appointed
by Christ head of the apostles. Therefore he had
primacy over them from Christ.

Quarto sic: ille qui tempore apostolorum omnium
ecclesiarum constituit sacerdotes super ipsos apostolos
habuit principatum. Sed temporibus apostolorum beatus
Petrus omnium ecclesiarum constituit sacerdotes iuxta
tenorem Innocencii pape, qui, ut legitur dist. 11, c. Quis
nesciat, ait, "Cum sit manifestum in omnem Italiam et
Gallias et Hispanias et Africam atque Siciliam et Insulas
interiacentes nullum instituisse ecclesias nisi eos quos
venerabilis apostolus Petrus aut successores eius
constituerunt sacerdotes." Ergo beatus Petrus super alios
apostolos habuit principatum.

[It is shown] fourth as follows. He who appointed
priests for all churches in the time of the apostles
had dominion over those apostles. But according to
a text of Pope Innocent which we read in dist. 11, c.
Quis nesciat, blessed Peter appointed priests for all
churches in the time of the apostles. He says
[col.26], "Since it is clear that no one established
churches in all of Italy, in Gaul, in Spain, in Africa
and in Sicily and adjoining islands except those
whom the venerable apostle Peter and his successors
appointed as priests ... ." Therefore blessed Peter
had dominion over the other apostles.

Quinto sic: beatus Petrus acceperat potestatem regendi
omnes apostolos, teste Gregorio qui, ut recitatur 2, q. 7,
c. Petrus, ait, "Petrus potestatem regendi acceperat, et
tamen idem apostolorum primus querimonie contra
eum", etc. Ergo beatus Petrus super apostolos habuit
principatum.

[It is show] fifth as follows. blessed Peter had
received power to rule all the apostles, as Gregory
attests. As is recorded in 2, q. 7, c. Petrus [col.496],
he says, "Peter had received power to rule, and yet
he who was first among the apostles [replied] to a
complaint [made] against him ... ." Therefore
blessed Peter had dominion over the apostles.

Discipulus Non curo quod pro veritate predicta multas
raciones adducas cum auctoritas ecclesie debeat ad
eandem tenendam sufficere. Canit enim ecclesia
universalis de beato Petro, "Tu es pastor ovium, princeps
apostolorum." Ideo ad alias quatuor asserciones de
quibus fecisti mencionem procede et motiva eorum
compendiose declara.

Student: I do not care for you to bring forward
many arguments for the aforesaid truth since the
authority of the church should be enough for it to be
held. For the universal church sings of blessed Peter,
"You are the shepherd of the sheep, prince of the
apostles." [See Significant Variants, para.
33.]Would you move on, therefore, to the other four
[actually five - end of chapter 14] assertions that you
mentioned and briefly make clear the arguments for
them.

Capitulum 17

Chapter 17

(2) Peter was not bishop of Rome
Magister Secunda assercio predictorum est quod beatus
Petrus non fuit Romanus episcopus. Ad quod ponendum
moventur ex hoc quod in tota Scriptura Divina actus
apostolicos describente minime reperitur quod beatus
Petrus fuerit Rome, et non videtur eis verisimile quod
beatus Petrus Romanam rexisset ecclesiam et tamen
beatus Lucas de ipso nullam omnino fecisset
mencionem.
215

Master: Their second assertion is that blessed Peter
was not bishop of Rome. They are moved to put this
from the fact that in all of the divine scripture that
describes the acts of the apostles we do not find that
blessed Peter was at Rome; and it does not seem
probable to them that blessed Peter would have
ruled the Roman church and yet that blessed Luke
would not have made any mention of this at all.

