mortalis inferioris Deo, quam sit bellum corporale inferior to God) than a physical war against one who
contra volentem personam privatam vel aliquem wishes to physically destroy a private person or some
populum neci tradere corporali. Sed licet absque population. But one is permitted to wage physical war
auctoritate principis in casu tam bellum particulare both private and public without the ruler's authority.
quam generale corporale suscipere. Ergo multo magis Therefore all the more is it permitted to preachers and
licet predicatoribus et doctoribus seu magistris absque doctors or masters to wage spiritual war without the
auctoritate principis mortalis contra papam hereticum authority of a mortal ruler against a heretic pope who
cupientem
totam
multitudinem
orthodoxorum intends to spiritually annihilate the entire multitude of
spiritualiter heretica occidere pravitate bellum spirituale true believers through heretical wickedness. Therefore
suscipere. Ergo licet eis doctrinam eius erroneam they are allowed to effectively condemn his false
efficaciter reprobare et publice expugnare.
doctrine and to overcome it publicly.
Discipulus: Quomodo respondetur ad auctoritates que Student: How does one respond to the authorities which
sonare videntur quod absque auctoritate principis nulli seem to say that no one is allowed to wage war without
licet bellum suscipere.
the ruler's mandate.
Magister: Ad omnes unica datur responsio, quia omnes Master: They all receive a single answer, in that they all
intelligende sunt quando auctoritas principis potest must be understood as operating when the authority of
convenienter haberi. Si autem principis auctoritas the ruler is conveniently available. If however the ruler's
convenienter haberi non potest, vel propter eius authority is not conveniently available, either because of
absentiam vel propter eius imperitiam aut impotentiam his absence or because of his lack of knowledge or
seu propter eius malitiam, licet absque eius auctoritate power, or because of his wicked disposition, one is
ex iusta et rationabili causa bellum suscipere non solum allowed, if the cause is just and reasonable, to wage not
particulare sed etiam generale.
only private but also public war without his authority.
Discipulus: Ista responsio innuit quod in pluribus Student: This reply suggests that in many cases, or
casibus vel propter diversas conditiones principis licet because of the ruler's different conditions, it is permitted
absque eius auctoritate bellum suscipere, unde predicta to wage war without his authority. Explain the
per exempla declara.
aforementioned cases by some examples.
Magister: Omnia per unum exemplum videntur Master: It somehow seems possible to explain
quodammodo posse declarari. Ponatur enim quod everything by a single example. Let us indeed assume
aliquis rex potens vel populus aliquam civitatem that some powerful king or people unjustly attacks a
invadat iniuste, satagens omnes cives extinguere et given city, fully intent on exterminating all the citizens
civitatem funditus dissipare. Si in hoc casu princeps and utterly destroying the city. If in this case the ruler of
civitatis est absens ita quod cives eius auctoritatem et the city is absent, so that the citizens are unable to obtain
consilium non possunt requirere, vel si princeps est his authority and directive, or if the ruler has lost his
alienatus a sensu vel alias infirmus, ita quod eis non mind or is otherwise incapacitated so that he can give
potest consulere, vel si etiam ipsemet princeps them no directive, or alternatively if the ruler himself
malitiose conatur tradere civitatem, civitati licet pro se wickedly attempts to betray the city, that city has the
defendenda bellum suscipere principe minime right to wage war in self-defence without the ruler's
annuente, imo ipso pro viribus resistente. Unde et per consent, even, to be sure, should he strongly resist this
multa exempla posset ostendi quod plures populi et initiative. Whence it might be shown by copious
communitates sepius deposuerunt iuste suos reges et examples that many peoples and communities frequently
principes et postea sibi principes elegerunt. Ex quo deposed their kings and rulers with justice, and
patet quod etiam populus absque auctoritate principis afterwards elected rulers for themselves. From which it
potuit ex causa iusta et rationabili contra principem similarly appears that a people, if its cause was just and
deponendum bellum movere.
reasonable, could have waged war against a ruler who
was to be deposed without the ruler's authority.
Capitulum 46
Chapter 46
Discipulus: Michi videtur ostensum aperte quod in Student: It seems clearly proved to me that in many
pluribus casibus licet populo absque auctoritate cases a people may wage a public war without the ruler's
principis bellum generale movere, ex quo concludi authority. From this one may conclude, it appears, that
potest, ut apparet, quod licet predicatoribus et preachers and doctors are permitted to wage spiritual war
doctoribus contra papam hereticum absque auctoritate against a heretic pope, and condemn his false doctrine
prelati cuiuscunque mortalis bellum spirituale without the authority of any mortal prelate. But I ask
suscipere, eius doctrinam erroneam reprobando. nevertheless that you provide some further arguments in
Nichilominus tamen peto ut ad eandem conclusionem favour of this conclusion.
aliquas alias rationes adducas.
Magister: Quod non solum sit licitum sed etiam quod Master: Here is the second main argument which it
predicatores et doctores teneantur doctrinam pape appears possible to advance to prove that it is not only
erroneam reprobare, irrequisita auctoritate cuiuscunque legal for preachers and doctors to condemn the pope's
prelati mortalis videtur posse probari secundo false doctrine, but that they are obligated to act without
436

