est securior, quod sic probatur. Illa via que est in advocates is not safer, which is proved as follows. The
favorem fidei christiane et non in probabile dispendium solution, which favours the Christian faith and does not
summi pontificis innocentis est securior quam illa via create a probable inconvenience for an innocent pope is
que potest vergere in notabile dispendium fidei safer than the solution, which can lead to a significant
orthodoxe et in periculosum favorem pape pravitate cost to the Christian faith and dangerously favour a pope
heretica
maculati.
Sed
deferre
huiusmodi besmirched by heretical wickedness. But to honour such
appellationibus et recusationibus interiectis ex causa appeals and demurrers (which stem from the
predicta, antequam legitime constet causam esse falsam, aforementioned cause) before it becomes legitimately
est in favorem fidei christiane et non est in probabile established that the cause is false, favours the Christian
dispendium vel periculum summi pontificis innocentis, faith and is not a probable inconvenience or danger to an
quia summo pontifici innocenti plurime vie patent omne innocent pope, because a supreme pontiff who is
periculum evadendi. Non deferre autem huiusmodi innocent has many available methods whereby he can
appellationibus et recusationibus potest vergere in evade all danger. But not to honour such appeals and
notabile dispendium fidei orthodoxe, et in favorem pape demurrers may lead to a notable cost for the Christian
heretici. Poterit enim libere papa hereticus pravitate faith and favour the heretic pope. Indeed a heretic pope
heretica corrumpere orthodoxos si nemo contra eum est might freely corrupt the orthodox with heretical
super crimine heresis audiendus. Deferre ergo wickedness if no one could be heard in court against him
huiusmodi appellationibus et recusationibus est via on the crime of heresy. Thus it is a safer solution to defer
securior et ideo est tenenda.
to such appeals and demurrers, and therefore the solution
should be followed.
Discipulus: Ista ratio dupliciter videtur deficere. Primo Student: There are two apparent defects in this reason. It
quia, sicut dixi, deferre appellationibus et recusationibus is defective, first of all, because, as I stated, to honour
huiusmodi potest vergere in personale periculum summi such appeals and demurrers may create a personal
pontificis innocentis, quia quilibet poterit eum diffamare danger for the supreme pontiff who is innocent, since
et multipliciter fatigare. Secundo deficit quia quamvis anyone might proceed to slander him and vex him in
non sit talibus appellationibus et recusationibus many ways. Secondly, it is defective because even if
deferendum, non tamen poterit papa hereticus libere such appeals and demurrers are not to be honoured, a
pravitate heretica corrumpere orthodoxos, quia si aliqui heretic pope could not for all that freely corrupt the
qui sint minime repellendi eum accusare voluerint de orthodox with heretical wickedness, because if some
heretica pravitate eis non debet audientia denegari.
persons who should not be excluded wanted to accuse
him of heretical wickedness, an audience in court could
not be denied to them.
Magister: Prima instantia tua frivola multis apparet, Master: Your first instance appears frivolous to many
quia sicut, quemadmodum notatur glossa Extra, De due to the following consideration. Just as (and this is
presumptionibus, c. Quia verisimile non est: "de nemine noted by the gloss [col. 789] to Extra, De
presumendum est, quod bona sua iactet, supra De presumptionibus, c. Quia verisimile non est) [col. 355]
renuntiatione, c. Super eo, et supra De restitutione "it is to be presumed of no one that he will throw away
spoliatorum, c. Sollicite", ita de nemine presumendum his goods, see above De renuntiatione, c. Super eo, [col.
est quod gratis confusioni et totius amissioni honoris ac 104] and above, De restitutione spoliatorum, c.
pene pravitatis heretice se exponat. Sed qui appellaret a Sollicite", [col. 280] so is it likewise to be presumed of
papa vel ipsum tanquam hereticum recusaret, eidem no one that he will expose himself gratuitously to
imponendo quod fidem christianam asserat esse falsam, embarrassment, complete loss of honour, and the penalty
se confusioni perpetue et amissioni totius honoris et of heretical wickedness. But he who would appeal from
pene pravitatis heretice exponeret. Talis enim propter the pope or enter a demurrer against him as a heretic,
tanti criminis impositionem tante persone omnibus alleging that he had asserted the Christian faith to be
predictis esset dignissimus. Ergo de nemine qui fuerit false, would expose himself to perpetual embarrassment,
bone discretionis et fame est presumendum quod tale to the loss of all honour, and to the penalty of heretical
quid velit mendaciter imponere summo pontifici. Quare wickedness. Such an individual would be hugely worthy
quantumcunque talibus appellationibus et recusationibus of all the aforesaid because of the imposition of a
deferatur, probabile periculum nequaquam imminet weighty crime to an eminent person. Therefore one must
summo pontifici innocenti, quia nullatenus oportet presume of no one who was of sound mind and
probabiliter formidare quod unquam aliquis tantum reputation that he would want to maliciously insinuate
crimen summo pontifici innocenti audebit imponere. Et something of the sort about the supreme pontiff. Thus,
si contingeret quod semel vel bis aliqui ad tantam no matter however much one defers to such appeals and
devenirent insaniam quod mendaciter tale crimen demurrers, a probable danger will never threaten a
imponerent summo pontifici innocenti et propter hoc supreme pontiff who is innocent, because it in no way
appellarent ab ipso vel recusarent eundem, non essent behooves to entertain a probable fear that someone
propter hoc tales appellationes vel recusationes would ever dare to impose such a weighty crime on a
regulariter repellende. Quia sicut in legibus statuendis supreme pontiff who was innocent. And if it should
354

