then happen in vain, because the holy souls will then receive the vision of God, and the whole person will then
be raised and will enter into the kingdom of God, it would be said to him just as easily that although the holy
souls now see God, yet that judgment will not then happen in vain, because the holy souls also will then have
clearer vision, and the whole persons composed of body and soul will then attain glory of body and soul.
To the argument, therefore, it must be said briefly that the general judgment will not happen in vain even if the
souls of the saints now see the divine essence, because that general judgment has many other purposes. For it is
ordained so that the whole persons composed of body and soul will then receive the glory of body and soul,
although the souls of some have earlier received it. It is also ordained that the glory of every soul that earlier saw
the divine essence may be increased. It will happen also so that many souls which previously did not see the
divine essence, because they had not then been purged, will then, reunited with their bodies, receive the vision of
God. It will happen also so that from that time on the wicked will be tortured not only in soul but also in body. It
is ordained also to this, that from that time every state of meriting and demeriting will cease.
Because of these things, therefore, it is an error to say that the general judgment would happen in vain if clear
vision were given to separated souls earlier. When it is inferred, "therefore it seems that the judgment happens in
vain if the reward is paid to souls before the judgment", this could be conceded of the reward that includes glory
of soul and body; but that reward is not paid to separated souls, because in the common course of Providence
glory of body will not be given before judgment.
CHAPTER 7
It continues:
And because it must not be said that the judgment is merely verbal and empty and fictitious, therefore, let us
dwell on that conclusion
Having laid down the arguments for the above-mentioned heresy, here its inventor and defender puts forward a
verbal, fictitious and frivolous protestation or revocation, and in this part six things are done. For first he puts
forward the reason why he has investigated the aforesaid matter [chapter 7]. Second he says that he has adhered
to this conclusion out of love of truth [chapter 8]. Third he shows why he has wished to promulgate the aforesaid
assertion of his and preach it publicly [chapter 9]. Fourth he says that it was not his intention to say anything
against faith, and therefore makes a certain protestation or revocation lest he be condemned for heresy [chapter
10]. Fifth, in deceptive and ambiguous words he claims that his zeal for this opinion is not pertinacious
[replacing "sed non pertinaciter relatis" with "se non pertinaciter zelare", as in chapter 11] [chapter 11]. Finally it
is narrated that he sought that a public instrument of his revocation should be made [chapter 12].
He says, therefore, that he wished to dwell upon this question because the general judgment is not only verbal
empty and fictitious. In these words, related [to explain] his assertions and arguments in favour of the often
mentioned assertion, he plainly suggests that the general judgment is pointless, empty and fictitious if the souls
of the saints see God before the judgment. But this is more clearly manifest in the preceding material.
CHAPTER 8
It continues:
And I say in my conscience that we would willingly favour another conclusion, and more willingly than that
negative conclusion, if that were shown to be true and necessary. If it were clear in faith that the souls of the
saints now see the face of God, no one would have a duty to defend that faith so much, nor would defend it,
more than we. For I am Christ's vicar, though unworthy, and the vicar general has to defend the honours more
principally than any particular vicar. Again, how could anyone believe that if the soul of my father or mother
clearly saw the face of God, that I would wish to deny it - perish the thought! Hence if the truth were proved
more clearly, then we would stand willingly, and more, in favour of the affirmative conclusion [rather than the
negative].
Here he says that he has adhered to his assertion out of love of truth. He shows this by the fact that he would be
more willingly in favour of the other conclusion if it were proved to him to be true. If he believes that by this he
is excused from heresy, he is foully deceived. For every heretic is known to adhere pertinaciously to his heresy
out of love of what he believes to be the truth, and nevertheless, despite this, heretics are in no way excused for
their heretical wickedness. Therefore how ever much he adheres, as he believes, out of love of truth to the
abovementioned negative conclusion, namely that the souls of the saints in heaven do not see God, nevertheless
by this he is not at all excused of heresy.
And that all heretics, indeed also Jews and pagans, adhere to their errors out of love of what they believed to be
truth is shown by clear authorities. For Jerome, as we read 24, q. 3. c. Haeresis, says in these words: "Heresy is
so-called in Greek from 'choice', namely that each chooses for himself the teaching that he thinks to be better".
From these words we gather clearly that heretics hold and choose the assertions they think more true, and thus
they adhere more willingly to their heresies out of love of what they believe to be truth, although many of them
would hold the opposites, if those were proved to be true; and yet by this they are by no means excused of
heresy. Therefore neither is he able to be excused of heresy by this.
Concerning the Jews also the same is proved by the authority of Christ, when he says in John 16[:2], "The hour
will come when everyone who kills you will think he preforms a service to God". By these words it is clearly
526

