promulgated here when he asserted that "the sword of the
Spirit which is the word of God" was to be taken up for
the utter defeat of heretics. Whence the gloss also states
in this context: "concerning this sword the Lord said 'I
came not to send peace but a sword'"[Glossa ordinaria to
the Bible]. Therefore both the master (Christ) and the
disciple (Paul) speak of the identical sword, and hence it
follows that the command to wage war against heretics
and especially against a heretic pope has already been
issued by the ruler, Christ.
Discipulus: Absque magna persecutione alias Student: Provide other authorities, but without extensive
auctoritates allega ex quibus ostenditur quod edictum discussion, whereby one proves that the command to
de bello spirituali gerendo contra papam hereticum a wage spiritual war against a heretic pope has already
principe iam exivit.
been issued by the ruler.
Magister: Hoc ex verbis Christi colligitur cum dicit Master: This may be gathered from the words of Christ
Mat. 16: "intuemini et cavete a fermento phariseorum et when he states in Matthew 16: "take heed and beware of
saduceorum". Quod apostoli primo intelligentes de the leaven of the Pharisees and of the
panibus postea per informationem Christi "intellexerunt Sadducees"[Matthew 16:6]. At first the apostles thought
quia non dixerit cavendum a fermento panum sed a this referred to breads, but afterwards through Christ's
doctrina phariseorum et saduceorum". Sed non est explanation "they understood how that he bade them not
cavendum a doctrina phariseorum et saduceorum nisi beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the
quia est contraria catholice veritati. Ergo si doctrina Pharisees and of the Sadducees"[Matthew 16:12]. But
pape heretici fuerit contraria catholice veritati ab ea one must beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of
penitus est cavendum. Hoc autem non facient the Sadducees only because it is contrary to catholic
predicatores sine certamine spirituali, ergo edictum de truth. Therefore if the doctrine of a heretic pope were
bello gerendo contra papam hereticum in simili a contrary to catholic truth one would need to beware of it
Christo iam exivit. Hoc etiam Christus insinuavit cum heartily. But preachers could not perform this warning
dixit Mat. 10: "ecce ego mitto vos sicut oves in medio task without spiritual combat, therefore a relevant
luporum. Estote ergo prudentes sicut serpentes" ne command to wage war against a heretic pope has already
scilicet doctrina pape heretici vos seducat. Item, Mat. been issued by Christ. Christ also conveyed this
24 ait: "videte ne quis vos seducat". Quibus verbis command when he stated in Matthew 10: "behold, I send
Christus omnes catholicos reddit cautos ne doctrina you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore
erronea cuiuscunque sive pape sive alterius seducantur, wise as serpents"[Matthew 10:16] so that, to be sure, the
et ut se contra eam expugnandam animosius attingant. doctrine of a heretic pope does not deceive you. Again,
Item, beatus Petrus prima canonica sua c. 5 ait: in Matthew 24[:4] he states: "take heed that no man
"vigilate quia adversarius vester diabolus tanquam etc." deceive you". By these words Christ cautions all
(usque ad "fortes in fide"). Si autem diabolo est per Catholics not to be deceived by anyone's false doctrine,
fidem resistendum, etiam pape heretico qui est de whether he is a pope or someone else, and to unite boldly
ducibus principalibus diaboli oportet resistere for the purpose of destroying it. Again, blessed Peter in
orthodoxos.
chapter 5 of his First epistle states: "be vigilant, because
your adversary the devil etc." (up to "steadfast in the
faith")[1 Peter 5:8-9]. But if one must resist the devil by
faith, then it is also proper for true believers to resist a
heretic pope, who is one of the devil's main generals.
Discipulus: Quamvis iste et alie auctoritates Student: Although these and other most numerous
quamplurime innuere videantur quod oportet authorities seem to imply that it is proper for true
orthodoxos contra papam hereticum bellum assumere, believers to wage war against a heretic pope, they do not
tamen non probant specialiter quod predicatores et for all that specifically prove that preachers, doctors, and
doctores ac magistri debeant contra papam hereticum masters must preach and teach against a heretic pope and
predicare et docere ac doctrinam eius publice publicly reject his doctrine.
reprobare.
Magister: Conceditur quod auctoritates superius Master: It is conceded that the authorities advanced
allegate et quamplures alie generales sunt, omnibus earlier and very many others are general ones, imposing
catholicis bellum spirituale contra papam hereticum on all Catholics the duty of waging spiritual war against
indicentes. Quia enim papa hereticus fidem impugnat, a heretic pope. For since a heretic pope attacks the faith,
et secundum Apostolum "una est fides", ideo omnes and according to the Apostle "the faith is one"[Ephesians
catholici contra papam hereticum bellum debent 4:5], that is the reason why all Catholics must wage war
assumere tanquam pro causa communi que una est against a heretic pope as a common cause which unites
omnium. Verumptamen sicut in exercitu se ad bellum them all. However, just as in an army which is preparing
431

