conservetur (17 q. 4 c. Reum). Honor autem ecclesie et for security is so that the honour of the church might be
universaliter omnium catholicorum et etiam Dei magis preserved (17 q. 4 c. Reum). [col. 817] But the honour of
conservatur per defensionem impugnantium hereticam the church and in general the honour of all catholics, and
pravitatem
quam
per
defensionem
malorum that of God also, is better preserved by a defense of the
quantumcunque ad ecclesiam confugerint. Ergo magis opponents of heretical wickedness than by a defense of
defendendi sunt quam tales mali predicti.
criminals no matter how many flee to the church for
security. Therefore these opponents must be defended
more than the aforestated criminals.
Discipulus: Alias rationes adducas.
Student: Present other reasons.
Magister: Quinto videtur posse probari eadem assertio Master: The same assertion may be proved as follows
sic. Fides catholica est magis defendenda quam patria. by a fifth reason. The catholic faith must be defended
Unusquisque autem debet defendere patriam iuxta illud more than one's country. But every single person must
sapientis: "pugna pro patria". Cui concordat Ambrosius defend his country in accordance with the sentiment of a
primo 'De officiis' qui, ut legitur 23 q. 3 c. Fortitudo, wise thinker [proclaiming]:"fight for your country".
ait: "fortitudo, que bello tuetur a barbaris patriam, vel [W.J. Chase, ed., The Distichs of Cato, Madison, Wisc.,
domi defendit infirmos, vel a latronibus socios, plena 1922, p. 12, no. 23 (collectio distichorum vulgaris)]
iustitia est". Ergo multo magis fides catholica est ab Ambrose agrees with this in book 1 of 'On offices', and
omnibus catholicis defendenda. Non autem defenditur states what we read in 23 q. 3 c. Fortitudo: "full of
fides nisi defensentur impugnantes hereticam justice is the courage to make war on barbarians for the
pravitatem. Igitur omnes catholici pro loco et tempore country's protection, to defend the helpless at home, or
impugnantes hereticam pravitatem debent defendere.
partners from bandits". [col. 897] Therefore all the more
must the catholic faith be defended by all catholics. But
the faith is not defended unless the opponents of
heretical wickedness are defended. Therefore all
catholics, when time and circumstance are appropriate,
must defend the opponents of heretical wickedness.
Sexto sic. Hoc debet catholicus impugnantibus papam Here is the sixth reason. A catholic owes to the
hereticum sine quo dilectio Dei et proximi non habetur. opponents of a heretic pope that without which the love
Sed absque defensione impugnantium papam hereticum of God and of one's neighbour cannot be realized. But
dilectio Dei et proximi non habetur. Quod autem there can be no love of God and of one's neighbour
dilectio Dei, patet, quia quod non fit impugnantibus without a defense of the opponents of a heretic pope. It is
propter Deum papam hereticum non fit Deo, iuxta illud evident that there can be no love of God, because what is
Christi Matth. 25: "quamdiu non fecistis uni de not done to those who oppose a heretic pope for God's
minoribus his, nec michi fecistis", ubi Christus asserit sake is not done to God Himself, according to the words
manifeste quod opera misericordie que non fiunt suis of Christ in Matthew 25: "inasmuch as ye did it not to
fidelibus, intelliguntur non fieri sibi, propter quorum one of the least of these, ye did it not to me". [Matthew
omissionem impii deputabuntur eternis suppliciis. Ergo 25:45] Christ obviously asserts here that works of mercy,
defensio que non exhibetur impugnantibus papam which are not done to his faithful, are understood as not
hereticum intelligitur non exhiberi Deo. Qui autem non done to him; and that non-performance of these works
exhibet defensionem debitam honori divino Deum non will send the impious to eternal torments. Therefore a
diligit. Ergo qui non defendit impugnantes hereticam defense not provided to the opponents of a heretic pope
pravitatem caret dilectione divina. Nec etiam habetur is understood as not provided to God. But one who does
dilectio proximi si impugnantes hereticam pravitatem not provide the defense owed to the divine honour does
minime defenduntur. Quia qui proximo in sua not love God. Therefore one who does not defend the
necessitate non subvenit caritatem proximi minime opponents of heretical wickedness lacks the love of God.
habet. Impugnantes autem papam hereticum maxime And the love of one's neighbour is also missing if the
indigent defensione. Ergo qui eos negligunt defensare opponents of heretical wickedness are not defended,
caritatem ad ipsos nullatenus habent.
because he who does not assist his neighbour in his
necessity does not show love towards his neighbour. But
the opponents of a heretic pope require to be defended in
the highest degree. Therefore those who neglect to
defend them have no love towards them at all.
Septimo arguitur sic. Non defendere Christum et non Here is the seventh argument. Not to defend Christ and
defendere discipulos Christi veritatem catholicam not to defend the disciples of Christ who announce
nuntiantes ad idem genus criminis pertinet, sicut catholic truth pertains to the same category of crime as
spernere Christum et spernere discipulos Christi. Sed does the spurning of Christ and the spurning of his
spernere Christum et spernere discipulos Christi ad disciples. But spurning Christ and spurning the disciples
culpam spectat consimilem, ipso Christo testante qui, ut of Christ involves an identical sin, Christ himself
habetur Luc. 10, dixit discipulis suis: "qui vos spernit attesting to this in Luke 10, where he said to his
330

