18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

1004

that for those witnesses the absence of any variant does not imply that that witness agrees with the
editor's text.
Use of colon in apparatus. Sigla for editors, witnesses, sources, when used to indicate the source of the
words of the text, will come after the "]" and be followed by a colon. For example, "et universis] Ki:
universis et Ww" means that the words of the text, "et universis", are a conjectural emendation by
Kilcullen, with all the witnesses (referred to collectively as "Ww") reading "universis et". If there is a
justifying comparison it will be added in brackets after the siglum: "et universis] Ki (cf. Brev. 2.5.2-3):
universis et Ww". (see note 11) Whenever the text is based on a reading of a witness not regularly
reported (see above) its siglum will appear before a colon, but this will not be done with witnesses
regularly reported - they will be assumed to agree with the editor's text unless a variant is recorded.
Exclusions and insertions. Words found in all or most MSS but rejected by the editor will be omitted
from the text, without use of "< >". The readings of the witnesses will be recorded in the apparatus in a
way that indicates what the editor has rejected: "dicit] Ki: ubi dicit Ww". Words not found in any MS
but added by the editor will appear in the text without square brackets. The conjecture will be noted in
the apparatus by means of the editor's siglum, thus: "asserere minorem] Ki: asserere Ww", meaning that
the witnesses have "asserere" and the editor has written "asserere minorem".
Insignificant variants. Variants of the following kinds will not be noted in the apparatus: dittography;
presence or absence of "c." (in canon law and bible references); variations between igitur/ergo,
vel/seu/sive/aut, et/atque/ac, nec/neque, ille/iste; transpositions that do not affect meaning; differences
of spelling; variation between arabic and roman numerals; deletions and marginal and interlinear
changes apparently made by the original scribe. Otherwise each variant from the witnesses regularly
reported (see above) will be noted even though the editor may feel that it is insignificant.
References to Ockham's works. We will indicate book (or question), chapter and line by means of
arabic numerals separated by full stops after the abbreviated title (not italicised). We will use Offler's
title abbreviations. Thus "OQ 4.3.131" refers to Octo questiones, q. 4, chapter 3, line 131; "Brev. 2.5.7"
refers to Breviloquium, book 2, chapter 5, line 7. (see note 12) The parts of the Dialogus will be
indicated by arabic numeral before the title and tractatus by a second arabic numeral after a full stop.
Thus "1 Dial. 3.2" refers to Dialogus, part 1, book 3, chapter 2; "3.1 Dial. 3.2" refers to Dialogus, part
3, tract 1, book 3, chapter 2. (see note 13)
References to the Bible. The names of books of the Bible will be as in the Vulgate or Douai versions.
Verse numbers will be given in footnotes but will not be inserted in the text.
References to Canon Law. We will not supply in the footnotes information already clear in the text.
This means that we will not supply the modern equivalents of Ockham's canon law references except
for Gratian's dicta. (see note 14) Ockham follows a well known and valid medieval reference system
that does not need to be reproduced in another form, but for Gratian's dicta his references are more
difficult to locate in the modern edition. For the reader's convenience we will give column references to
Friedberg's edition, which is widely available. If a better edition becomes available during the course of
our project we will refer to it.
References to Canon Law glosses: For references to the gloss we will give in the footnotes a modern
reference to the relevant canon law text followed by a column reference to the Lyons 1671 edition. This
edition has no particular authority and is not everywhere available (though microfilm can be got from
the Cambridge library). However it seems necessary to give references to some edition to assure readers
that we have found the passage and so that a reader can retrace our steps if we seem to have made a
mistake. References will be in the form ''gloss, col. 79, .s v. dicendo". We will not include in the
footnote any information clear from the text (e.g. "s. v..." is not needed if the equivalent is in the text).
In the text we will not use italics for titles [e.g. Augustine De doctrina christiana no caps. This was
Offler's practice. Should we follow?], except for titles that are opening words ("Solite") and for titles of
sections of the law ("De maioritate et obediencia").
In the text references not integrated into the syntax of the sentence (e.g. not introduced by "ut legitur",
"ut notat" or the like) will be in brackets. For example: Nam sepe verbum generale non est generaliter
intelligendum (Extra, De iureiurando, Ad nostram, et 1, q. 1, Duces). Unde et "verbum generale sepe
restringitur", ut notat Glossa, Extra, De appellacionibus, Sua nobis. . .
Sigla: Sigla used in the apparatus will as far as possible be uniform in format, to make it easier for users
to recognise the different elements of the apparatus. A siglum will normally consist of two letters, the
first upper case and the second lower case (e.g. Fr), not italicised, not including numerals or
superscripts. (see note 15) The sigla already used in the web site (see
http://www.britac.ac.uk/pubs/dialogus/sigla.html) will be used in the printed edition, with the following
amendments: Pd to become An, Md to become Es, Ve to become Sm, and the series Rc-Rg to become
Vc-Vg. Other sigla include "Vulg" for the vulgate Bible; "Fb" for Friedberg's Corpus iuris canonici;
"Gl" for the gloss to the canon law. "Ww" will be used as siglum to mean all the witnesses collated,

