sancti sint sed quod sancti presumuntur donec
contrarium constet;" et infra, "quod hic dicitur 'semper
benefacere' intelligitur de hiis que possunt eque
retorqueri ad bonum et malum, quia semper in dubio
pro ipsius facto presumitur, sed certe hoc idem est in
quolibet sacerdote, ut 11, q. 3, Absit et 41 dist. c. 1 et
16, q. 1, Si clericatus. Respondeo: hoc verum est sed
tamen hoc magis presumitur pro papa, ut 93 dist. c. 2.
Unde sacrilegii instar esset disputare de facto suo, ut
19, q. 4, para. Qui autem."

Anastasius and dist. 21, Nunc autem opposed?" It says
in reply to this objection, "But it is not said here that
they are holy but that they are presumed to be holy
until the opposite is certain ... when it is said here
'always to act well' it is understood of those things that
can equally be twisted to good and to evil because
always when ther is doubt a presumption is made in
favour of his action, but certainly the same thing is so
for any priest at all, as in 11, q. 3, Absit, dist. 41, c. 1
and 16, q. 1, Si clericatus. I reply that this is true but
yet it is presumed more in the case of the pope, as in
dist. 93, c. [1]. So it would be a kind of sacrilege to
dispute about his deed, as in [17], q. 4, para. Qui
autem."

Ad sextam racionem respondetur, sicut ad primam,
quod non est universaliter verum quod si quilibet de
collegio potest errare totum collegium potest errare,
quia quandoque collegium specialiter preservatur et
tamen nulla singularis persona tali modo specialiter
preservatur. Sic eciam dominus aliquis temporalis
posset aliquod monasterium conservare impediendo
omnes simul occidi preter unum, quamvis nullam unam
singularem personam quamdiu essent multi vellet
defendere; sed si contingeret omnes simul occidi preter
unum illum defenderet quousque sibi alius in eodem
monasterio iungeretur et ex tunc illum sibiipsi
relinqueret. Talis dominus monasterium conservaret et
tamen nullum de monasterio conservaret, nisi in casu
ad tempus.

The reply to the sixth argument is, as to the first, that
it is not universally true that if anyone at all from a
college can err the whole college can err, because
sometimes a college is specifically kept safe without
any particular individual being specifically kept safe
in such a way. In this way too some temporal lord
could preserve some monastery by preventing
everyone there except for one person from being
killed at the same time, even if he were unwilling, as
long as there were many of them, to defend any one
particular person. But if it were to happen that all of
them except one were killed at the same time he
would defend that one until he was joined by someone
else in the same monastery and from then on he would
leave him to himself. Such a lord would be preserving
the monastery and yet he would not be preserving
anyone from the monastery, except in a certain
situation for a while.

Ad septimam racionem respondetur quod non est
obediendum pape si aliquid precipiat contra legem Dei
vel bonos mores. Si enim preciperet fornicari aut idolis
immolare vel demones invocare aut fidem Christi
negare vel aliquid de se malum, non esset sibi
obediendum. Sacri autem canones loquuntur in casu in
quo precipit papa aliquid licitum ad suum spectans
officium.

The reply to the seventh argument is that the pope
should not be obeyed if he orders anything against the
law of God or against good morals. For if he were to
order someone to fornicate, to sacrifice to idols, to
invoke demons, to deny faith in Christ or to do
something wrong in itself he should not be obeyed.
The sacred canons, however, speak of the case in
which the pope orders something permissible and
pertaining to his office.

Ad ultimum respondetur quod in casu papa potest
iudicari ab homine.

The reply to the last is that in a certain situation the
pope can be judged by man.

Capitulum 6

Chapter 6

Discipulus Post predicta de papa cupio scire quid de
collegio cardinalium senciant litterati, an scilicet omnes
extiment quod collegium cardinalium possit heretica
pravitate respergi.

Student: Following on from the above [remarks]
about the pope I want to know what the learned think
about the college of cardinals, that is, whether they
all think that the college of cardinals can be stained
by heretical wickedness.

188

