… Omissis …

Capitulum 65
Chapter 65
Discipulus: Quamvis adhuc de fautoribus hereticorum Student: Although many matters pertaining to abettors
et heretice pravitatis essent investiganda quamplura, de of heretics and of heretical wickedness would still
quibus, applicando ad determinatas personas, in tractatu require to be investigated, (and I shall scrupulously
De gestis circa fidem altercantium orthodoxam sollicite proceed to do so, with reference to specific persons, in
indagabo, tamen illis obmissis transeo ad defensores the treatise On the deeds of those disputing about
hereticorum et heretice pravitatis, de quibus in primis orthodox faith), nevertheless, putting these matters
peto ut narres michi qui defensores hereticorum et aside, I now focus attention on defenders of heretics and
heretice pravitatis sunt censendi.
of heretical wickedness, and as to these I request first of
all that you would explain to me who are to be identified
as defenders of heretics and of heretical wickedness.
Magister: Respondetur quod cum defendere rem Master: The answer is that since to defend some thing
aliquam sit ab impugnatione tueri vel rei impugnate is to protect it from attack or to render assistance against
contra impugnantem opem ferre, impugnatio autem an attacker thereof, while an attack may be undertaken
tripliciter fieri potest, scilicet verbo, scripto, et facto, in three ways, namely, verbally, in writing, or by deed,
multipliciter contingit defendere hereticos et hereticam one may defend heretics and heretical wickedness in
pravitatem, secundum quod heretici et heretica pravitas many ways, just as heretics and heretical wickedness
possunt multipliciter impugnari. Hereticus enim may be attacked in many ways. For a heretic may be
impugnari potest facto alicuius qui conatur hereticum attacked by the action of someone who attempts to
captivare, aut detinere, aut iudici presentare, vel trahere capture him, or to arrest him, or to bring him before a
ad iudicium ut de eo fiat iustitie complementum. Potest judge, or to haul him off to judgement so that justice
etiam impugnari verbo et hoc multipliciter, vel in iudicio might take its final course concerning him. [=execution
cum rite et debite accusatur, vel extra iudicium, cum GK] A heretic may also be attacked verbally, and this in
eius perfidia per predicatores et doctores, prelatos aut many ways, either when he is duly and properly accused
alios non ignaros, nescientibus ut caveant nunciatur. in court, or outside of the courtroom when preachers
Scripto etiam impugnari potest, in iudicio cum contra and doctors, prelates, or others in the know, reveal his
eum scribitur, vel extra iudicium cum eius perfidia treachery to the uninformed so that the latter may take
rationibus et auctoritatibus demonstratur, et absentibus precautions. A heretic may also be attacked in writing:
per epistolas intimatur. Heretica autem pravitas verbo et in court when one writes against him, or outside of the
scripto poterit impugnari. Verbo quidem, cum in courtroom when his treachery is demonstrated by
sermonibus aut lectionibus vel secretis colloquiis reasons and authorities, and the absent informed of it by
reprobatur. Scripto vero, cum ad reprobandam hereticam letters. Heretical wickedness, for its part, may be
pravitatem scripta catholica componuntur.
attacked verbally and in writing. Verbally: when it is
castigated in sermons or lectures or in secret
discussions; and in writing, when catholic works are
composed to condemn heretical wickedness.
Ex hiis colligitur quod contingit hereticos et pravitatem One gathers from these options that heretics and
hereticam multipliciter defendere, et quot modis heretical wickedness may be defended in many ways,
contingit hereticos et pravitatem hereticam impugnare, and that by whatever methods one might attack heretics
tot modis et forte pluribus defendi possent. Contingit and heretical wickedness, the same methods (and
igitur defendere hereticos facto, impediendo videlicet ne possibly more) would be available for purposes of
capiantur vel detineantur ut de eis fiat iustitie defense. Therefore, one may defend heretics by deed,
complementum. Contingit etiam eos defendere verbo in namely, by preventing their capture, or by preventing
iudicio et extra iudicium, allegando quod non sunt their being arrested, so that they not suffer justice taking
heretici reputandi. Scripto etiam contingit eos defendere, its final course. One may also defend them verbally in
libros et epistolas componendo ad ostendendum et court, or outside of the courtroom, by maintaining that
nuntiandum quod non sunt inter hereticos computandi. they are not to be considered heretics. One may also
Pravitatem etiam hereticam contingit tripliciter defend them in writing, by composing books and letters
defendere, scilicet facto, verbo, et scripto. Facto quidem to prove and to proclaim that they must not be
dupliciter ad presens. Uno modo, ipsos impugnatores ab numbered among the heretics. One may likewise defend
impugnatione prohibendo. Alio modo, impugnationes et heretical wickedness in three ways, namely, by deed,
allegationes
eorum
scriptas
destruendo,
sive verbally, and in writing. And as to action two methods
comburendo sive alio modo, vel malitiose detinendo et might be mentioned at present. One would be to forbid
impediendo ne ad notitiam perveniant aliorum. Verbo its opponents to attack it. Another method would consist
etiam contingit pravitatem hereticam defendere, in destroying their written oppositions and allegations,
456

