salvantur in illa fide que fuit in apostolis explicite et
adhuc est in maioribus, si maiores non sunt simplices in
lege divina et sunt catholici et fideles. Si enim soli
illiterati vel parvam habentes noticiam legis divine
essent catholici et omnes episcopi et religiosi ac clerici
essent heretici, quamvis illiterati non crederent explicite
multa que spectant ad fidem, credentes tamen illam esse
veram fidem quam predicaverunt apostoli et pro qua
sancti martires sunt occisi, salvarentur in fide maiorum,
scilicet apostolorum et aliorum sanctorum qui credebant
explicite illa que isti credunt implicite.

in the faith of the church, this should be understood
[as meaning] that they are saved in that faith which
the apostles explicitly had and which elders still
have, if the elders are not simple in divine law, are
catholics and are believers. For if only the unlearned
or those having little knowledge of divine law were
catholics and all bishops, religious and clerics were
heretics then even if the unlearned did not explicitly
believe many things which pertain to the faith yet in
believing that the true faith is that which the apostles
preached and for which the holy martyrs were killed
they would be saved in the faith of the elders, that is,
of the apostles and other saints who believed
explicitly what they believe implicitly.

Capitulum 9

Chapter 9

Discipulus Audivi qualiter tenentes secundam
assercionem respondeant ad raciones pro prima
assercione, nunc affecto scire quomodo primi assertores
nituntur dissolvere raciones inductas pro assercione
secunda.

Student: I have heard how those who hold the
second opinion reply to the arguments for the first
opinion. Now I want to know how those affirming
the first opinion try to refute the arguments brought
forward for the second opinion.

Reply to arguments that the Cardinals can become heretics
Magister Ad primam dicitur quod sicut secundum
sanctos patres Christus immediate dedit primatum
Romane ecclesie, et de hoc tamen nulla mencio in
Scriptura Divina habetur, ita Christus promisit quod
Romana ecclesia esset usque ad finem seculi duratura.
Romana autem ecclesia est collegium cardinalium. Cum
vero dicitur quod collegium cardinalium est institutum a
summo pontifice, respondetur quod quamvis ita sit
institutum a summo pontifice tamen succedit priori
collegio quod errare non potuit, et ideo nec ipsum potest
errare contra fidem.

Master: To the first it is said that just as according to
the holy fathers Christ directly gave primacy to the
Roman church and yet there is no mention of this
found in divine Scripture, so Christ promised that the
Roman church would last to the end of the age.
However the Roman church is the college of
cardinals. But when it is said that the college of
cardinals was established by the highest pontiff, it is
replied that although it was established in this way by
the highest pontiff it nevertheless succeeds an earlier
college that could not err, and therefore neither can it
err against faith.

Ad secundam dicitur quod summus pontifex non potest
collegium cardinalium destruere vel cassare, sicut nec
potest statum ecclesie immutare (25, q. 1, c. Que ad
perpetuam).

To the second it is said that the highest pontiff can
not destroy or make null the college of cardinals, just
as he can not change the condition of the church (25,
q. 1, c. Que ad perpetuam [col.1007]).

Ad terciam dicitur quod collegium cardinalium succedit
illi ecclesie que temporibus apostolorum errare non
potuit, et ideo non potest errare.

To the third it is said that the college of cardinals has
succeeded that church which could not err in the time
of the apostles, and therefore it can not err.

Ad quartam dicitur quod conceditur quod aliqua
ecclesia inferior papa non potest errare contra fidem,
sicut ecclesia Romana cui presidet papa est inferior
papa et tamen non potest errare contra fidem.

To the fourth it is said that it is granted that some
church inferior to the pope can not err against the
faith, just as the Roman church over which the pope
presides is inferior to the pope and yet can not err
against the faith.

Ad quintam dicitur quod nullus qui est sic extra
collegium cardinalium quod in hiis que credit collegium
cardinalium adversatur eidem potest salvari, quamvis

To the fifth it is said that no one who is outside the
college of cardinals, in the sense that he is opposed to
it in matters that the college of cardinals believes, can

199

