WILLIAM
OF
part 1, prologue and book 1
Text
and
translation
by
as at december, 2003
Copyright © 2003, The British Academy

OCKHAM,
John

Kilcullen

DIALOGUS
and

John

Scott

See also version with variants and alternative translation.
Prologus

Prologue: The beginning of the prologue to the books
of the dialogues which are engaged in by a master and
his student.
IN OMNIBUS curiosus existis, nec me desinis infestare. YOU ARE CURIOUS about everything and do not
Quamvis enim ob multos editos laboriose tractatus scias cease pestering me. For though you know I am not a
me non modicum fatigatum, quoddam tamen opus little wearied by the many treatises I have painstakingly
insolitum fieri postulas importune. Nam ut de produced, still you insistently demand that an unusual
controversia que super fide catholica et multis work be made . For you shamelessly ask that I compose
incidentalibus inter Christianos nunc vertitur nescio for you some kind of "summa" about the controversy
quam summam tibi componam impudenter exposcis, et over catholic faith and many related matters now taking
audacter formam procedendi modumque loquendi place among Christians, and you boldly intend, as you
michi, ut dicis, intendis imponere. Sane cum tuam say, to impose on me a form of proceeding and a way of
fuerim importunitatem frequenter expertus, non eo quod speaking. Now since I have frequently experienced your
amicus meus es sed propter importunitatem tuam importunity I will try to comply with your wish, not
voluntati tue parere conabor. Quale ergo opus et because you are my friend, but because of your
quomodo edi desideras manifesta.
importunity . Make clear, therefore, what sort of work
you want and how you want it to be produced .
Discipulus: VEHEMENTER EXULTO quod meis Student: I REJOICE GREATLY that you are acceeding
supplicationibus acquiescis. Teneo enim firmissime to my requests. For I strongly maintain that this future
quod opus futurum occasionem inveniendi veritates work will provide an opportunity for discovering many
quamplurimas toti Christianitati perutiles ministrabit. truths very useful to all of christianity. I want it to be
Quod opto in tres distingui tractatus, quorum primum divided into three tractates, the first of which I want to
"De hereticis", secundum "De dogmatibus Iohannis be called, "On heretics", the second, "On the teachings
vicessimisecundi ", tertium "De gestis circa fidem of John XXII", and the third "On the deeds of those
altercantium orthodoxam" volo vocari. Totum vero opus disputing about orthodox faith". I consider that the
"Dyalogum" censeo appellandum. Peto enim ut per whole work should be called "The Dialogue". For I ask
interrogationem et responsionem fiat; volo nam-que te that it proceed by question and answer. For I want to
interrogare et tu michi respondebis. Persona autem mea question you, and you will reply to me. Let my role be
nomine "Discipuli", tua vero nomine "Magistri " notetur denoted by the name, student, and yours by the name,
, in quo personam recitantis assumas . Nec tantum unam master, under which name take on the role of one who
sed plures quando tibi videbitur ad eandem reports. Do not set out only one opinion but, when it
interrogationem narra sententias.
seems appropriate to you, several opinions about the
same question.
Sed quid tua sapientia sentit michi velis nullatenus But would you consent not to indicate to me what you in
indicare. Quamvis enim velim omnino ut cum diversas your wisdom think? For although I certainly do not want
et adversas assertiones fueris discussurus , tuam quoque you to make no mention of your own opinion too when
minime pretermittas, que tamen sit tua nullatenus you come to discuss different and conflicting assertions,
manifestes. Ad quod petendum moveor ex duobus. would you nevertheless not make clear what it is? I am
Primum est quia tantam de tua doctrina estimationem moved to ask this for two [reasons].The first of these is
obtineo quod propter sententiam quam te omnino scirem that I hold your teaching in such high estimation that I
asserere intellectum proprium cogerer captivare. In hiis would be compelled, on account of an opinion that I
autem que modo gestio indagare tua nolo auctoritate knew for sure that you claim as your own, to make my
moveri, sed quid in me possint rationes et auctoritates own understanding captive to it. About those matters
quas adduces ac meditatio propria experiri.
that I now want to investigate, however, I do not want to
be moved by your authority but to find out what the
arguments and texts that you, and my own reflection,
will adduce can effect in me . [note on grammatical
problems: nolo... sed experiri ...adduces... meditatio
propria]
Secundum est quia, cum amor et odium, superbia, ira et The second is that, since love, hate, pride, anger, envy
invidia ac nonnulle alie anime passiones in inquisitione and some other passions of the mind impede, indeed
1

