scire et iudicare quod talis questio nec per episcopum individual would be able to appeal such an issue to the
nec per ipsum metropolitanum debeat terminari, sed metropolitan: not indeed as to the person having the
quod est summo pontifici vel generali concilio function of defining such a doubt, but as to one with
reservanda. Per predicta contrarietas suprascripta authority to know and to judge that such a question
dissolvitur, quia pro causa fidei in nullo casu est ad ought not to be decided either by the bishop or by the
hominem secte contrarie appellandum tanquam ad illum metropolitan himself, but was to be reserved for the
qui questionem fidei habeat diffinire. Nec isto modo supreme pontiff or for the general council. These
Paulus Cesarem appellavit. Sciebat enim quod Cesar considerations solve the contradiction mentioned above,
fidem Pauli falsissimam reputabat. Aliquando tamen because in no circumstance may one appeal for a cause
licuit pro causa fidei ad hominem secte alterius of faith to a person of the contrary religious orientation
appellare tanquam ad illum qui ex officio vel electione as to someone who has the function of defining a
appellantis vel alio quovis modo cognoscere potuit quod question of faith. Nor did Paul appeal to Caesar in this
iudices sui de questione fidei se intromittere minime fashion. For he knew that Caesar considered the faith of
debuerunt, et hoc modo Paulus Cesarem appellavit. Paul to be utterly false. But occasionally it was permitted
Sciebat enim Paulus quod nulla persecutio adhuc per to appeal for a cause of faith to a person of alternative
romanos aut Cesarem contra christianos fuerat excitata, religious persuasion, as to someone who (by his official
et ideo sciebat quod iudices Cesaris de tali questione function or by the choice of the appellant or by any
secundum leges Cesaris se intromittere non debebant. method whatever) could judicially investigate and
Propter quod, ut habetur Act. 18, Gallio proconsul declare the legal irrelevance of his judges with respect to
Achaie cum Paulus sibi accusaretur a iudeis quod contra a question of faith. It is on the latter basis that Paul
legem persuaderet colere Deum, accusationem appealed to Caesar. For Paul knew that up to this point in
huiusmodi audire nolebat, dicens: " 'si quidem esset time no persecution had been undertaken against the
iniquum aliquid aut facinus pessimum, o viri iudei, recte Christians by the Romans or by Caesar, and therefore he
vos sustinerem, si vero questiones sunt de verbo et knew that Caesar's judges, according to the laws of
nominibus et legis vestre vos ipsi videritis, iudex ergo Caesar, did not have the legal competence to intervene
horum nolo esse,' et minavit eos a tribunali". Ex quibus with respect to this question. This is why (we have the
verbis colligitur quod iudices missi a Cesare de hiis que account in Acts 18) Gallio the proconsul of Achaia,
pertinebant ad legem iudicandi potestatem minime when Paul was accused to him by the Jews of convincing
habuerunt. Unde et Pilatus, sicut evangelica patefacit people to worship God in a manner opposed to the
historia, propter nullam accusationem que de lege Jewish law, refused to hear this accusation in court,
asserebatur contra Christum reputavit se debere iudicare saying: " 'if it were a matter of wrong or wicked
Christum, sicut etiam ex Actibus Apostolorum c. 23 et lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear
24 et 25 et 26 tribunus Lysias, Felix preses, Festus with you: But if it be a question of words and names, and
preses, et rex Agrippa propter illa que obiciebantur of your law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such
contra Paulum de lege et de doctrina Pauli iudicabant matters.' And he drove them from the judgement seat".
ipsum minime puniendum. Paulus igitur sciens quod [Acts 18:14-16] From these words one gathers that the
talis questio etiam secundum leges et consuetudines judges sent by Caesar did not have the authority to
romanorum ad iudices et publicas potestates inferiores adjudicate matters pertaining to the Jewish law. Hence
Cesare nullatenus pertinebat Cesarem appellavit, Pilate also, as the Gospel account makes clear, did not
tanquam ad illum qui iudicaret talem questionem ad consider himself competent to judge Christ on the basis
iudices coram quibus Paulus fuerat accusatus minime of any accusation made against Christ with respect to the
pertinere.
Jewish law. In the same way the texts of chapters 23
[Acts 23:29] and 24 [Acts 24:25] and 25 [Acts 25:25]
and 26 [Acts 26:31] of the Acts of the Apostles show
that the tribune Lysias, governor Felix, governor Festus,
and king Agrippa firmly believed that Paul was not to be
punished on account of the issues which were objected
against him concerning the Jewish law and Paul's
doctrine. Therefore Paul, knowing that such a question
even on the basis of the laws and customs of the Romans
in no way pertained to judges and public authorities
inferior to Caesar, appealed to Caesar as to the authority
who would judicially declare that such a question did not
concern the judges before whom Paul had been accused.
Capitulum 22
Chapter 22
Discipulus: Contra predicta quattuor michi obiectiones Student: Four objections occur to me against what has
occurrunt. Primo quidem videtur quod ex quo preses just been stated. First of all it appears that since governor
Festus sciebat quod talis questio ad illum non spectabat Festus knew that such a question did not pertain to his
non oportuit Paulum propter hoc appellare ab ipso, quia jurisdiction, it was inopportune for Paul to have appealed
309

