heretici et penam defensorum incurrunt, quemadmodum heretic pope, and incur the punishment of defenders,
illi ad quos spectat ex officio defendere clericum just as those who have the official function of defending
verberatum sunt fautores eiusdem violentie et eandem a battered clerk are considered abettors of the violence
penam incurrunt, si possunt defendere et non faciunt he suffers, and incur the same punishment as the
(Extra, De sententia excommunicationis, Quante). Alia batterers, if they can defend the clerk yet fail to do so
est opinio quod tales non sunt defensores pape heretici, (Extra, De sententia Excommunicationis, Quante). [col.
quia defensio aliquem actum exteriorem importat. Tales 909] There is another opinion that such are not
autem nullum actum exteriorem ad dictam defensionem defenders of a heretic pope, because a defense implies
pertinentem exercent.
some overt action. Such people, however, do not
perform any overt action relevant to the stated defense.
Discipulus: Quid sentitur de illis qui defendunt papam Student: What is the feeling concerning those who
hereticum verbo vel scripto, asserendo et dicendo quod defend a heretic pope verbally or in writing, asserting
non est hereticus reputandus.
and stating that he is not to be reputed a heretic.
Magister: Hoc potest multis modis contingere. Uno Master: There are many ways in which this can happen.
modo, verbo vel scripto asserendo et affirmando quod One way is to maintain and to confirm verbally or in
errores ei impositos (quos in rei veritate pertinaciter writing that the heretic pope does not hold nor utter,
tenet) non tenet nec dicit, neque asserendo neque either as an assertion, or as an opinion, or as a mere
opinando neque recitando; alio modo, quod errores dicit recited statement, the errors which are imputed to him,
et tenet tantummodo opinando et eos nullatenus errors which in reality he holds with pertinacity.
pertinaciter asserendo; alio modo, quod errores impositi Another way is to claim that he holds and utters these
pape non sunt inter hereses computandi. Si primo modo, errors merely as opinions, and that he does not assert
distinguitur, quia aut sciunt se dicere falsum aut nesciunt them with pertinacity. Yet another way is to suggest that
se dicere falsum, et tunc vel laborant ignorantia crassa et the errors imputed to the pope are not to be classified
supina, vel probabili. Si sciunt se dicere falsum, non among the heresies. If one follows the first option, a
tantum crimen incurrunt mendacii, sed etiam scienter distinction is in order. For either the defenders know
defensores pape heretici sunt censendi et penam that they are lying, or they do not know that they are
defensorum incurrunt. Si autem nesciunt se dicere lying, and in the latter eventuality their ignorance is
falsum, et laborant ignorantia crassa et supina ( quia either grossly passive, or justifiable. If they know that
nolunt scire vel contempnunt aut negligunt scire), they are lying, they not only commit the crime of
quamvis secundum aliquos a crimine mendacii valeant mendacity, but are also to be reckoned conscious
excusari, tamen a crimine defensionis pape heretici defenders of a heretic pope, and incur the penalty due to
minime excusantur, et ideo in penam incidunt such defenders. If, however, they do not know that they
defensorum. Si vero nesciunt se dicere falsum et are lying, ands their ignorance is grossly passive
laborant ignorantia probabili, nec crimen mendacii nec (because they do not want to know, or scorn to know, or
crimen defensionis hereticorum committunt, quia ab neglect to know), then, although according to some they
utroque crimine per ignorantiam probabilem excusantur. might be excused of the crime of mendacity, they
Consimiliter distinguitur de asserentibus papam dicere nevertheless are hardly excused of the crime of
errores
impositos
tantummodo
opinando
vel defending a heretic pope, and therefore they lapse into
tantummodo recitando. Quia si sciunt vel credunt se the penalty due to such defenders. If, on the other hand,
dicere falsum, crimen mendacii et etiam crimen they do not know that they are lying, and their ignorance
defensionis heretici manifeste comittunt. Si vero is justifiable, then they commit neither the crime of
nesciunt et laborant ignorantia crassa et supina, sunt mendacity nor the crime of defending heretics, since
defensionis heretici crimine involuti. Si autem laborant their justifiable ignorance excuses them of both crimes.
ignorantia probabili, de utroque crimine excusantur. Si There is a similar distinction with respect to those who
autem dicunt quod errores impositi pape non sunt inter assert that a pope is stating the errors imputed to him
hereses computandi, non solum sunt censendi merely as opinions or recitations. For if they know or
defensores heretici, sed etiam sunt defensores heretice believe that they are lying, then they manifestly commit
pravitatis, quod verum est si errores pape heretici sunt the crime of mendacity, and also the crime of defending
explicite condempnati, et taliter defendentes papam a heretic. If, on the other hand, they do not know that
hereticum pertinaciter tenent quod errores impositi non they are lying, and their ignorance is grossly passive,
debent inter hereses reputari.
then they are involved in the crime of defending a
heretic. But if their ignorance is justifiable, they are
excused of both crimes. And if they say that the errors
imputed to the pope are not to be classified among the
heresies, then they must not only be reckoned defenders
of heretics, but also defenders of heretical wickedness.
This is true if the errors of a heretic pope are errors
explicitly condemned, and if those who defend a heretic
pope in this way pertinaciously hold that the imputed
458

