aliorum errores, eo quod defensores facto errorum modis nonetheless also be understood of those who defend the
prescriptis gravius peccare videntur quam solummodo errors of others by deed, in that those who defend the
pro erroribus allegantes. Defendentes enim facto modis errors of others by deed in the ways described appear to
prescriptis errores pape heretici tam in Deum quam in be committing a more serious sin than those who merely
proximum directe peccare dinoscuntur. Quia et argue in support of these errors. Indeed, those who
veritatem catholicam manifestari impediunt, et ipsis defend by action (in the ways described) the errors of a
impugnatoribus pravitatis heretice graviter iniuriantur heretic pope, are known to be sinning directly against
dum eorum personis molestiam inferunt, et in eorum both God and their neighbour. For they prevent the
infamiam aliquid ludibrium circa catholicas allegationes manifestation of catholic truth, and also do serious
exercent. Qui autem pro erroribus aliorum solum verbo injury to the very opponents of heretical wickedness, in
vel scripto pertinaciter allegare presumunt, in Deum that they inflict harm upon their persons, and besmirch
tantummodo peccare videntur. Et ideo si defensores their reputation by dealing outrageously with their
allegando solummodo pro erroribus sunt dampnabiliores catholic allegations. On the other hand, those who
illis qui errant, multo magis illi qui in favorem et presume to argue pertinaciously in support of the errors
defensionem errorum impugnatores errorum crudeliter of others merely verbally or in writing, only appear to
persequuntur, et infamia eorum allegationes catholicas be committing a sin against God. And therefore, if those
irreverenter et probrose tractant, sunt dampnabiliores who defend by merely arguing in support of errors are
hiis qui errant si solummodo stant in errore et nichil plus more to be condemned than those who err, then all the
faciunt. Cum vero dicitur quod Urbanus loquitur de illo more those who, in order to support and defend errors,
qui aliis offendicula erroris preparat et confirmat, et de cruelly persecute the opponents of errors and besmirch
illo qui est magister erroris, que duo non conveniunt nisi the latter's reputation by dealing outrageously and
allegantibus pro errore, respondetur quod utrumque abusively with their catholic arguments, should receive
istorum
potest
aliquo
modo
persequentibus a greater condemnation than those who err (if they only
impugnatores errorum et destruentibus impugnationes adopt the error and do nothing else besides). When one
errorum competere. Nam talis potest dici aliis states, however, that Urban is speaking of someone who
offendicula erroris quodammodo preparare et confirmare prepares and confirms stumbling blocks of error for
in quantum removet prohibentia erroris, nam et others, and of someone who is a master of error (two
removens prohibentia aliquando causa vocatur. Potest characteristics which only apply to individuals who
etiam dici quodammodo magister erroris in quantum argue in support of error), the answer is that both of
facto docet et monstrat quod errores sunt tenendi.
these characteristics may in some manner be applicable
to those who persecute the opponents of errors, and to
those who destroy the scripted allegations against errors.
For such an individual may be said to prepare stumbling
blocks of error to others in some fashion, and to confirm
these in so far as he removes the factors which prohibit
error. Indeed, sometimes one who removes prohibitions
may be called the cause of what ensues. He may also in
some sense be termed a master of errors to the extent
that he in fact teaches and demonstrates that errors are
to be professed.
Discipulus: Alias allegationes ad eandem adducas Student: Bring forth other arguments in support of the
assertionem.
main contention.
Magister: Hoc Isidorus, ut habetur 11 q. 3 cap. Qui Master: Isidore appears to witness in its favour when he
consentit peccantibus, testari videtur, dicens: "qui states (we have it in 11 q. 3 c. Qui consentit
consentit peccantibus, et defendit alium delinquentem, peccantibus): "he who gives his consent to sinners, and
maledictus erit apud Deum et homines, et corripietur defends another who is committing a crime, will be
increpatione severissima. Hinc etiam quidam cursed before God and men, and subjected to the most
sanctissimus pater ait: 'si quis peccantem defendit, acrius severe reprobation. This is where a most holy father
quam ille, qui peccavit, coherceatur' ". Ex quibus verbis says: 'if someone defends a sinner he will be punished
colligitur quod qui papam hereticum, pro crimine heresis more forcefully than the one who commits the sin' [St
persequendo impugnatores et impugnationes, defendit, Basil, Regulae breviores, regula 7]". [col. 671] One
acrius quam papa hereticus coherceri debet.
gathers from these words that he who defends a heretic
pope by persecuting his opponents and their arguments
by imputing the crime of heresy to them, must be
punished more forcefully than the heretic pope.
Discipulus: Ista auctoritas non loquitur nisi de Student: This authority only speaks of one who defends
defensore delinquentis, non de defensore pravitatis a criminal, and not of a defender of heretical
heretice, et ita ad propositum non esse videtur.
wickedness, and thus it seems irrelevant to the
contention.
460

