locutus est de potestate et ita concessit quod Pilatus Apostle "receive" to himself "damnation"[Romans 13:2],
super ipsum potestatem habuit ordinariam. Insinuat which is untrue. Under such circumstances one would
tamen quod ista potestate ordinaria abutebatur cum dicit not be allowed to resist a usurper of the papal office, nor
"qui tradidit me tibi maius peccatum habet" quasi indeed any tyrant. Therefore the Apostle does speak of
diceret "tu habes peccatum dando sententiam in me legitimate and not of usurped power. Therefore Christ
neque confessum neque legitime convictum de crimine [also] spoke of power in this way and thus conceded that
digno morte, quia tamen ex timore hoc facis et alii me Pilate possessed normal authority over him. But when
tibi ex malitia et invidia tradiderunt ideo illi maius Christ states "he that delivered me unto thee hath the
peccatum habent". Et ita Pilatus potestatem ordinariam greater sin" he implies that Pilate was misusing this
super Christum in quantum erat homo mortalis habuit. normal authority, as if he were saying "you are sinning
in condemning me when I have neither confessed nor
been legitimately convicted of a crime worthy of death.
But because you are doing this out of fear, while others
have delivered me to you out of malice and envy, theirs
is the greater sin". And thus Pilate possessed normal
authority over Christ in so far as the latter was a mortal
man.
Quod Theophilus super illud Ioh. 18 "a temetipso hoc Theophilus appears to hold this opinion. Commenting on
dicis an alii tibi dixerunt de me" sentire videtur, dicens: the text of John 18[:34] "Sayest thou this thing of
"ac si diceret Christus scilicet 'si hoc ex teipso loqueris thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?" he states: "it is
pande signa mee rebellionis aut si ab aliis percepisti as if Christ were saying 'if you are uttering this of
inquisitionem fac ordinariam'". Ex quibus verbis yourself, reveal the evidence of my rebellion, but if you
colligitur quod Pilatus potestatem habuit ordinariam have been informed by others, proceed to a normal
inquirendi de criminibus Christo impositis. Qui autem inquisition'". [Marsilius, II.iv.5] From these words we
habet potestatem inquirendi ordinarie de aliquo gather that Pilate possessed a normal authority to
infamato habet iurisdictionem coactivam super eundem. investigate the crimes imputed to Christ. But he who
Ergo Pilatus habuit super Christum iurisdictionem possesses a normal power of investigation with respect
coactivam. Item, Bernardus in epistola ad to someone who has been slandered in this way, has
archiepiscopum Senonensem ait: "cum", inquit, coercive jurisdiction over him. Therefore Pilate had
"Romani presidis potestatem Christus super se quoque coercive jurisdiction over Christ. Furthermore: Bernard
fateatur celitus ordinatam etc." Ex quibus verbis elicitur in his letter to the archbishop of Sens states: "since", he
quod potestas Pilati non fuit usurpata sed celitus says, "Christ acknowledges that the authority of the
ordinata. Et ita super Christum iurisdictionem habuit Roman ruler over him has likewise been legitimized by
coactivam, quam tamen in Christum exercere minime heaven etc." [Marsilius, II.iv.12] From these words we
potuisset iuste nisi Christus coram eo legitime, quantum deduce that the power of Pilate was not usurped but
iudici constare potest, fuisset convictus de crimine. Si legitimized by heaven. And he thus possessed coercive
autem Christus per testes qui secundum leges repelli jurisdiction over Christ, which, however, he could not
non possunt fuisset de crimine dampnationis dignissimo have justly exercised over Christ unless Christ were
ordine iudiciario servato convictus, Pilatus Christum legitimately convicted of a crime in his presence, as far
condempnando non peccasset, quia fuisset per falsos as this could have been apparent to a judge. For if Christ
testes deceptus. Iudex autem iudicans secundum had been convicted of a crime most worthy of
allegata amore iustitie non peccat, licet condempnet condemnation in the context of a formally correct trial,
innocentem.
and on the basis of evidence given by witnesses
unimpeachable under the laws, Pilate would not have
sinned in pronouncing a sentence of condemnation
against Christ, since he would have been deceived by
false witnesses. And a judge who rules on the basis of
the evidence and is motivated by the love of justice does
not sin even if he condemns an innocent person.
Capitulum 5
Chapter 5
Discipulus: Pro ista ratione que adduxisti ad presens Student: What you have advanced in support of this
sufficiant, et ideo aliam rationem adducas.
argument suffices for the moment, therefore present
another one.
Magister : Ad probandum quod imperator est iudex Master: Here is the third argument which proves that
ordinarius pape tertia ratio talis est. Ille est iudex the emperor is the normal judge of the pope. The pope's
ordinarius pape a quo papa habet super alias ecclesias normal judge is one from whom the pope has rulership
principatum. Sed hoc habet papa ab imperatore, quod over the other churches. But the pope has this from the
probant per privilegium Constantini imperatoris emperor, a fact they prove by the privilege conceded to
concessum Romano pontifici, quod est superius the Roman pontiff by Emperor Constantine (this was
276

