castigando et corripiendo ipsum corrigere, accessurus rather he is so called. You cannot throw him out of
est tecum ad altare. Noli timere", et infra: "sane si iudex church, you have no possibility of changing him through
es, si iudicandi potestatem accepisti, ecclesiastica rebuke or correction, and he will be marching with you
regula, si apud te accusatur, si veris documentis to the altar. Fear not". [col. 902] And further on: "of
testibusque convincitur, coherce, corripe, excommunica, course if you are a judge, if you have received the
degrada". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod non ad authority to adjudicate, if he is accused before you, if he
socios sed ad prelatos spectat corrigere delinquentes, et is convicted by legitimate examples and witnesses, use
per consequens non ad socios sed ad prelatos spectat the rule of the church to coerce him, to correct him, to
defendere passos iniurias quia cuius est defendere excommunicate him, to lower his status". [col. 902] One
patientem iniuriam eius est reprimere et per consequens gathers from these words that the correction of
plectere iniuriam inferentem.
delinquents pertains not to partners but to prelates, and
consequently that it pertains not to partners but to
prelates to defend those who have suffered harm, since
the same instance which must defend him who suffers
harm has the duty to prevent the harm and thus to punish
the perpetrator thereof.
Secundo probatur idem sic. Si socius tenetur defendere Here is a second proof of the same point. If a partner is
socium, videns aliquem verberare clericum et non bound to defend a partner, then a person who sees
defendens ipsum sententiam excommunicationis someone battering a clerk and does not defend the latter
incurreret iuxta auctoritatem Innocentii tertii superius would incur a sentence of excommunication according to
allegatam. Sed hoc est inconveniens, sicut glossa ibidem the authority of Innocent III, which was cited above. [1
tali ratione probat: "nullus est excommunicatus ex facto Dial. 6.41] But this is inconvenient, as the contextual
alterius nisi participando vel in locutione, vel in gloss proves [col. 1919] by the following reasoning: "no
oratione, aut in crimine, supra eodem, capitulo Nuper, one is excommunicated by the deed of another unless he
vel nisi mandatum vel auctoritatem prestiterit, supra participates by comment, by verbal incitement, or in the
eodem, capitulo Mulieres". Sed hic nullo tali modo criminal act itself, see above, same question, c. Nuper;
participat, ergo non est excommunicatus, et per [col. 900] or unless he has issued the order or granted the
consequens socius non tenetur defendere socium.
authority for the commission of the deed, see above,
same question, c. Mulieres". [col. 891] But in the issue at
hand no one is participating in this way, therefore no one
is excommunicated, and consequently a partner is not
obligated to defend a partner.
Tertio probatur idem ratione quam innuit glossa ubi A third proof of the same point stems from the reason
supra et eandem tangit glossa 23 q. 3 c. Non inferenda, implied by the gloss just cited (the identical argument is
que sic potest formari. Nullus tenetur ad illud pro quo touched upon by the gloss [col. 1294] to 23 q. 3 c. Non
potest ex pacto recipere pecuniam, quia illud ad quod inferenda) and may be constructed as follows. No one is
quis de necessitate absque omni pacto tenetur debet obligated to do something for which he may be
gratis impendere. Sed pro defensione socii socius licite remunerated by contract, because that to which someone
recipit pecuniam, nec receptam pecuniam tenetur is necessarily obligated independently of any contract he
restituere. Ergo socius non tenetur socium de necessitate must perform without payment. But a partner lawfully
absque pacto defendere.
receives money for the defense of a partner, nor is he
bound to return the money received. Therefore a partner
is not necessarily bound to defend a partner
independently of a contract.
Quarto ostenditur idem sic. Non magis tenetur socius Here is a fourth demonstration of the same point. A
socium defendere quam teneatur medicus periclitantem partner does not have a greater obligation to defend a
infirmum gratis curare. Sed medicus non tenetur gratis partner than a doctor would be obligated to cure without
infirmum curare, quia de suo non tenetur quis facere payment someone who was dangerously ill. But a doctor
beneficium (10 q. 2 Precarie). Ergo nec socius tenetur is not obligated to cure the ill for nothing, because no
socium gratis defendere.
one is obligated to grant favours from what belongs to
them (10 q. 2 Precarie). [col. 621] Therefore neither is a
partner obligated to defend a partner for nothing.
Quinto sic. Defensio socii est quedam militia vel aliquid Here is the fifth proof. The defense of a partner is a type
simile militie. Sed nemo tenetur suis stipendiis militare, of military service or something that resembles this. But
testante Apostolo qui 1 Cor. 9 ait: "quis militat suis no one is bound to perform military service at his own
stipendiis unquam" quasi diceret "nullus". Ergo nemo expense, witness the Apostle who states in 1 Corinthians
tenetur alium gratis defendere. Sexto sic. Defendere 9: "who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges?",
socium est benefacere. Sed nemo tenetur alii benefacere [1 Corinthians 9:7] as if he were saying "no one".
gratis quia per leges nemo cogitur benefacere sed Therefore nobody is obligated to defend another without
337

