defend himself. But if a partner is unable to defend
himself, or is unable or unwilling to pay money for his
defense, the other person is bound to defend him for
nothing. However he may subsequently demand money
from the partner and the latter is obligated to reimburse
his benefactor.
Ad quartam respondet glossa dis. 83 dicens: "patet hic The gloss to dis. 83 [col.400] responds to the fourth
quod medicus gratis tenetur curare pauperem infirmum, objection by stating: "it is clear in this context that a
quia plus debet valere apud eum vita illius quam propria doctor is obligated to heal gratis a poor person who is ill,
pecunia ut 86 dis. c. Non satis. Sed quid si infirmus because the life of the ill person must have greater
dives est et nichil vult dare medico. Nunquid gratis weight in the doctor's judgement than his own pecuniary
tenetur eum curare. Videtur quod non, cum nemo de suo interest, see dis. 86 c. Non satis. [col. 300] But what if
cogatur facere beneficium, ut 10 q. 2 c. Precarie, cum the ill person is rich and doesn't want to pay the doctor.
etiam medicus licite potest recipere mercedem, ut 14 q. Must the latter cure him for nothing. It appears not, since
5 c. Non sane, dico quod tenetur eum curare suis no one is forced to provide a benefit from his own
impensis, et si convaluerit repetat expensas, quia utiliter property, see 10 q. 2 c. Precarie, [col. 620] since, also,
gessit negotium eius".
the doctor is entitled to receive a reward, see 14 q. 5 c.
Non sane, [col. 742] I say that the doctor is obligated to
heal the patient at his own expense, and should the
patient recover the doctor may claim his expenses
because he effectively dealt with the patient's problem".
Discipulus: Ista videtur michi fortis allegatio pro Student: This appears to me a strong argument in favour
assertione prefata, quod scilicet quilibet tenetur in of the assertion we are discussing, namely that everyone
periculo constitutum defendere et iuvare, cui tamen is obligated to defend and to assist someone who is in
repugnare videtur quod glossa allegat dicens 'nemo de danger. But it appears that the gloss does not agree with
suo cogitur facere beneficium (10 q. 2 Precarie)'. Unde this position when it states in argument that "no one is
quomodo ad hoc respondetur expone.
entitled to provide a benefit from what belongs to him
(10 q. 2 c. Precarie)". [col. 400] Do explain how one
responds to this.
Magister: Dicitur quod illa auctoritas truncate allegatur, Master: One responds by saying that this authority is
quia verba illius capituli 10 q. 2 Precarie sunt hec: "cum argued in mutilated fashion, because the actual words of
ratio et usus obtineat neminem cui non vult contra the chapter 10 q. 2 Precarie are as follows: "since both
utilitatem et rationem cogi de proprio facere reason and custom hold that no one who does not want
beneficium", que longe aliam sententiam continent to should be forced against reason and interest to provide
quam dicere quod nemo de suo cogitur beneficium a benefit from what belongs to him". [col. 621] These
facere. Sepe enim lege divina pariter et nature ac etiam words imply a conclusion much different than to simply
lege humana cogitur quis de suo beneficium facere, say that no one is forced to provide a benefit from his
aliter enim nemo eleemosynam de suo facere alii property. For one is often forced to provide a benefit
teneretur, quod legi divine et nature ac etiam humane from one's property equally by divine and by natural law
noscitur obviare. Nemo tamen contra utilitatem suam et and also by human law. Indeed no one would otherwise
contra rationem cogitur de proprio beneficium facere. be obligated to give alms to another from his property,
Non enim dare eleemosynam de proprio est contra an eventuality known as contrary to divine law, natural
rationem nec contra utilitatem spiritualem eleemosynam law, and human law also. But no one is forced to provide
facientis, licet quandoque sit contra utilitatem a benefit from his property against his interest or against
temporalem. Sic etiam defendere socium gratis absque reason. Surely to give alms from one's property is neither
mercede temporali non est contra utilitatem saltem against reason nor against the spiritual interest of the
spiritualem nec contra rationem, et ideo sepe cogitur almsgiver, although it may sometimes be against his
quis lege nature et divina tale beneficium aliis gratis temporal interest. Similarly, to defend a partner for
impendere.
nothing without temporal reward is not against one's
interest (spiritual at least), nor against reason, and
therefore one is frequently forced by divine and natural
law to provide such a benefit to others for nothing.
Discipulus: Ista responsio videtur apparens. Ideo dic Student: This response seems apparent. State therefore
qualiter ad quintam instantiam respondetur.
how one responds to the fifth instance.
Magister: Respondetur quod regulare est neminem Master: The answer is that as a rule no one is bound to
teneri suis stipendiis militare pro persona privata. Fallit perform military service at his own expense on behalf of
tamen in casu, quia si aliquis militando potest salvare a private person. But the rule occasionally fails, because
vitam alterius qui non potest sibi reddere stipendium, if someone by performing military activity can save the
debet propriis stipendiis pro eo militare salvando vitam life of another who cannot pay him remuneration, he is
347

