Discipulus: Indica que sunt alie conclusiones quas Student: Disclose the other conclusions which are held
tenet predicta opinio.
by the opinion under review.
Magister: Secunda conclusio est quod predicatores et Master: The second conclusion is that preachers and
doctores qui impugnatores doctrine erronee pape doctors who attack thinkers opposing the pope's
quantum ad assertionem non dampnatam explicite, non erroneous doctrine because of a statement not explicitly
solum rationibus et auctoritatibus sed etiam detrahendo condemned, and attack them not just by arguments and
et in perpera irrogando aut contra eos alios provocando authorities, but also by disparaging their persons and
vel eis per se vel per alios molestiam quomodolibet inflicting wickednesses upon them, or by provoking
inferendo, impugnant, peccant mortaliter et sunt others against them, or by distressing them in whatever
fautores heretice pravitatis. Quia qui propter bonum et fashion, personally or through others, sin mortally and
licitum infert alteri nocumentum notabile, peccat are collaborators in heretical wickedness. For he who
mortaliter, et si propter impugnationem licitam heretice causes notable harm to another on account of a good and
pravitatis infert alteri nocumentum, est fautor heretice lawful action, sins mortally, and is a collaborator in
pravitatis. Sed impugnare assertionem pape hereticam heretical wickedness if he causes harm to another
licet non sit dampnata explicite est bonum et licitum. because of the latter's lawful opposition to heretical
Ergo predicatores et doctores qui propter wickedness. But to oppose a heretical assertion of the
impugnationem huiusmodi inferunt impugnantibus pope is a good and lawful thing even if that assertion is
nocumentum notabile peccant mortaliter et sunt not explicitly condemned. Therefore preachers and
fautores heretice pravitatis. Hoc autem faciunt qui eis doctors who cause notable harm to opponents because of
detrahunt et in perpera et contumelias irrogant, et qui such opposition sin mortally and are collaborators in
contra eos alios provocant vel per se vel per alios heretical wickedness. And this is what they do who
molestiam irrogant. Ergo peccant mortaliter et sunt disparage the opponents, and inflict wickednesses and
fautores heretice pravitatis.
indignities upon them, and who provoke others against
them, or distress them personally or through others.
Therefore they sin mortally and are collaborators in
heretical wickedness.
Tertia conclusio est quod illi predicatores et doctores The third conclusion is that those preachers and doctors
qui impugnatores pape heretici propter assertionem who attack thinkers opposing the pope because of a
dampnatam explicite quam non possunt faciliter scire statement explicitly condemned, do not sin mortally and
esse dampnatam explicite propter imperitiam in should not be considered collaborators of heretical
scripturis auctenticis, aut propter defectum librorum, wickedness if they merely attempt to fortify the pope's
aut propter quamcunque aliam causam propter quam statement by arguments and authorities and only try to
nesciunt papam de heresi impugnari, impugnant, refute the contrary statement by arguments and
assertionem
pape
solummodo
rationibus
et authorities, and also if they cannot easily know that the
auctoritatibus satagendo munire et assertionem pope's assertion is explicitly condemned - either due to
contrariam rationibus et auctoritatibus tantummodo their lack of expertise in understanding original
improbare conando, non peccant mortaliter nec sunt documents, or because they don't possess the relevant
fautores heretice pravitatis censendi, quia absque texts, or because of any other reason whatsoever which
peccato mortali potest quis, dummodo pertinaciam non explains their being unaware that the pope is being
adiungat, opinando negare assertionem catholicam attacked for heresy. For as long as there is no added
etiam explicite approbatam, et contrariam hereticam pertinacity on his part someone may, without committing
assertionem dampnatam explicite opinari. Si enim a mortal sin, emit an opinion which negates even an
aliquis non habens memoriam de historia libri Regum explicitly approved catholic assertion, and hold as an
absque pertinacia diceret et rationibus aliquibus opinion the contrary, explicitly condemned, heretical
confirmaret quod David non habuit simul plures assertion. If for instance someone having a memory lapse
uxores, non peccaret mortaliter nec esset fautor heretice about events described in the Book of Kings were to say
pravitatis. Sic dicunt aliqui quod licet quidam qui without pertinacity and confirm with a few arguments
nunquam viderunt decretalem Nicholai tertii Exiit qui that David did not simultaneously have many wives [2
seminat opinarentur, et suam opinionem auctoritatibus Samuel 2:2], he would neither sin mortally nor be a
et rationibus confirmare studerent, quod Christus habuit collaborator in heretical wickedness. Similarly there are
alicuius rei proprietatem, quamvis hoc facerent some who say that if those who have never seen the
imitando papam hereticum qui hoc diceret, non decretal of Nicholas III called Exiit qui seminat were to
peccarent mortaliter si dictam decretalem Exiit faciliter emit the opinion that Christ had property in some thing,
habere non possent, nec scirent papam propter and carefully confirmed their opinion by authorities and
assertionem predictam a viris eruditis in sacra pagina reasons, even were they to do this in imitation of a
impugnari, quia opinari heresim dampnatam explicite heretic pope's statement to the same effect, they would
nescienter potest quis absque peccato mortali et fautoria not sin mortally if they could not easily obtain this
heretice pravitatis, dummodo pertinacia nullatenus decretal Exiit, or did not know that the pope was being
misceatur.
attacked by men highly learned in Holy Writ for having
450

