naturale ius preferre oportet."

canonical scripture, it is also opposed to natural law. So
it is necessary to prefer natural law to anything which it
is considered should be esteemed less than the divine
will, canonical scripture or divine laws." [Cf. Gratian,
[Treatise on Laws, pp. 25, 28,32.]
Ex hiis patenter habetur, ut apparet istis, quod It seems to them that we clearly learn from the above
quecunque in iure canonico theologie vel iuri naturali --- that anything in canon law found contrary to theology or
quod non solum in theologia sed etiam in philosophia to natural law--which is contained not only in theology
morali (eo quod incepit "ab exordio rationalis creature", but also in moral philosophy (in that it [natural law]
ut habetur dist. 6, para. His) continetur ---invenirentur "began with the first rational creature", as we find in
contraria per alteram scientiarum dictarum essent dist. 6, para. His ita respondetur [col.11, Treatise on
penitus reprobanda. Ergo utraque de talibus habet Laws, p. 21])--by either of those sciences, should be
certissime iudicare, et eo certius scientiarum huiusmodi wholly condemned. Therefore each of those sciences
tractatores haberent de talibus iudicare quam canoniste has the power to judge such matters most certainly, and
quo principiis certioribus, dignioribus, prioribus et the experts on such sciences would have the power to
universalioribus uti noscuntur.
judge such matters more certainly than canonists, in that
they are known to use more certain, worthier, prior and
more universal principles.
Secundo principaliter isti assertionem suam exemplo Secondly (principally), they try to make their assertion
moliuntur ostendere, referentes quod cum commentator known by an example, recounting that when a
librorum beati Dionysii de multis capitulis a suis emulis commentator on the books of blessed Dionysius, having
(qui papam et cardinales muneribus corrumperant) been accused in connection with many articles by his
accusatus cogeretur in consistorio respondere, ipse rivals, who had corrupted the pope and cardinals with
tanquam purus philosophus et theologus omnino iuris gifts, was forced to reply in consistory, he, as a pure
ignarus a papa petiit advocatum. Cui papa respondit, philosopher and theologian completely ignorant of the
"Absit ut tibi, qui inter omnes mundi clericos literatior law, asked the pope for an attorney. The pope replied to
reputaris, hanc confusionem faciamus ut alius pro te him, "Let us not shame you, who are regarded as more
loquatur. Pro te ipso loquaris." Qui, cernens malitiam, learned than all the other clerics in the world, by having
recepta copia obiectorum, et acceptis ad deliberandum another speak for you. You may speak for yourself."
trium dierum indutiis , quarta die respondit ad omnia When he perceived this malice, having accepted a copy
legum civilium et iurium canonicorum quamplurium of the objections and received a recess of three days for
contra ipsum allegatorum, in quibus adversarii suam deliberation, he replied on the fourth day through
intentionem insolubiliter (ut putabant fundaverant, per theology and natural reason to all of the many civil and
theologiam et rationem naturalem, ita patenter pro se canon laws brought against him on which his
intellectum
assignans
quod
iudicio
omnium adversaries had, indissolubly as they thought, based
intelligentium cuncte leges et iura que contra ipsum their accusation, so clearly assigning them meaning in
fuerant allegata pro ipso liquido concludebant. Unde, ut his favour that all the laws that had been alleged against
fertur, cardinales sibi contrarii postmodum eius emulos him were, in the judgement of all who understood,
arguentes dixerunt, "Vos dixistis istum episcopum plainly conclusive in his favour. Whence, as is reported,
nescire leges et iura. Ipse scit principia, radices et causas the cardinals who had been opposed to him afterwards
omnium legum et iurium." Ex quibus isti concludunt accused his enemies, saying, "You said that this bishop
quod ille theologus, qui et magnus philosophus, multo does not know the [civil and canon] laws. He knows the
certius clarius et profundius iudicavit de intellectu principles, roots and causes of all the [civil and canon]
iurium, quorum antea nullam habuerat omnino laws." From this they conclude that this theologian, who
memoriam, quam theologie et rationis naturalis ignari, was also a great philosopher, judged more certainly,
qui tamen ab infantia in illis fuerant enutriti.
deeply and clearly about the meaning of the laws, of
which he had had absolutely no memory before, than
those ignorant of theology and natural reason who had
nevertheless been nourished from their infancy in those
matters. [The story is probably about Grosseteste. See
David Luscombe, "William of Ockham and the
Michaelists on Robert Grosseteste and Denis the
Areopagite", in The Medieval Church: Universities,
Heresy and the Religious Life (ed. Peter Biller and
Barrie Dobson), Studies in Church History. Subsidia
Series, Boydell and Brewer, Woodbridge, Suffolk,
1999.]
Capitulum 10
Chapter 10
Discipulus: NUNC ADVERTO quod assertiones que Student: I NOW PERCEIVE that assertions that seem
15

