faciliter scire.
Magister: Respondetur quod hoc potest contingere Master: The answer is that this may happen because of
propter ignorantiam predicatorum et doctorum et the ignorance of preachers and doctors, and because of a
propter defectum librorum. Multi enim sunt lack of documents. Indeed there are preachers and
predicatores et doctores tam simplices et tam parvam doctors who are so simple-minded and have such
scripturarum habentes notitiam et peritiam, quod minimal knowledge of and expertise in written sources,
veritates quam plurimas sanctarum scripturarum that they are ignorant of very many truths of Holy Writ,
ignorant et de determinationibus ecclesie parum vel and know little or nothing about the church's
nichil sciunt. Multi etiam eorum ad copiam determinations. And there are also many preachers and
scripturarum in quibus veritates catholice plures doctors who do not have easy access to copies of
explicite approbantur et per consequens falsitates writings in which many catholic truths are explicitly
contrarie reprobantur et condempnantur faciliter approved, and consequently many contrary falsehoods
pervenire non possunt. Sicut, ut dicunt, pauci preter are rejected and condemned. Just as, say these
fratres Minores habent decretalem Nicholai tertii in qua commentators, few except the Brothers Minor possess
explicite approbatur quod abdicationem proprietatis the decretal of Nicholas III in which there is explicit
omnium rerum Christus verbo docuit et exemplo approval that Christ taught by word and confirmed by
firmavit et per consequens falsitas contradictoria est example the abandonment of property in all things, and
explicite condempnata. Condempnationem etiam thus the contradictory falsehood is explicitly condemned
summorum pontificum qui magistros quosdam [Exiit qui seminat, Liber Sextus, col. 1112]. Few
parisienses
dampnantes
statum
mendicantium likewise, except the Brothers Preachers and Minors have
condempnaverunt, pauci habent preter fratres the condemnation issued by supreme pontiffs who
Predicatores et Minores, et ita multi ad scripturas condemned certain Parisian masters for their negative
continentes dampnationem talium heresum facile judgement on the status of Mendicants [Alexander IV,
pervenire non possunt. Quidam autem a peritis longe Non sine multa (1257): cf. Ockham OP III, p. 115]. And
distant, nec adest eis opportunitas consulendi peritos, thus many preachers and doctors do not have easy access
quare si non sunt in scripturis excellenter instructi non to writings which contain the condemnation of such
facile scire possunt tales hereses esse explicite heresies, while some preachers and doctors are far
condempnatas.
removed from specially qualified erudites and have no
opportunity of consulting them. Therefore if they are not
well instructed as to written sources they cannot easily
know that such heresies are explicitly condemned.
Discipulus: De exemplis adductis in secundo tractatu We shall discuss the enumerated examples in the second
De dogmatibus Iohannis 22 loquemur, per que, treatise "Concerning the doctrines of John XXII".
quamvis malitiose ab emulis adducantur, intelligo Although his enemies are pursuing a wicked agenda in
quomodo aliqui predicatores seu doctores de presenting these examples, I do understand through them
quibusdam heresibus non possunt faciliter scire an sint how it is possible that some preachers or doctors cannot
explicite condempnate. Quamobrem enarra qualiter per easily know about certain heresies whether they are
prescriptas distinctiones ad interrogationem propositam explicitly condemned. Wherefore describe how one
respondetur.
answers the question initially raised with the help of
these distinctions.
Magister: Respondetur quinque conclusiones tenendo. Master: The answer involves holding five conclusions.
Quarum prima est, quod predicatores et doctores The first of these is that preachers and doctors who attack
assertiones impugnantium papam hereticum de in words alone the contentions of those who oppose a
assertione que non est dampnata explicite impugnantes, statement by a heretic pope which is not explicitly
solo sermone nitendo convincere per rationes et condemned, attempting to prove through arguments and
auctoritates quod assertiones eorum contrarie assertioni authorities that the contentions of these opponents which
pape heretici non continent veritatem, non sunt are contrary to the statement of the heretic pope are not
censendi fautores heretice pravitatis, nec ex hoc solo truthful, should not be interpreted as aiding and abetting
sunt reputandi peccare mortaliter. Hec conclusio heretical wickedness, nor are they to be reckoned by this
probatur per hoc quod theologi possunt absque fautoria fact alone to have committed a mortal sin. The proof of
heretice pravitatis et absque peccato mortali circa this conclusion is that theologians are entitled, without
assertiones theologicas que non sunt explicite being deemed collaborators in heretical wickedness or
approbate nec explicite condempnate contrarie opinari, mortals sinners, to offer contrary opinions concerning
et opiniones suas contrarias rationibus et auctoritatibus theological propositions which are not yet explicitly
fulcire conari. Ergo licet papa hereticus et approved nor explicitly condemned, and to attempt to
impugnatores eius teneant opiniones contrarias, absque bolster their contrary opinions by arguments and
fautoria heretice pravitatis et absque peccato mortali authorities. Therefore even if a heretic pope and his
possunt predicatores et doctores assertionem pape que opponents should hold contrary opinions, preachers and
in rei veritate est heretica, licet hoc nesciant, conari doctors may attempt to positively defend a statement of
448

