possible for someone to know that it is contained explicitly or implicitly in divine scripture or in the teaching of
the Church; and whoever knows that it is contained explicitly or implicitly in divine scripture is bound to believe
it explicitly; therefore, etc. And it follows from this that someone is bound at one time to believe something only
implicitly, and at another time is bound to believe it implicitly [explicitly?]; therefore, etc. And Thomas indeed
seems to suggest this plainly when he says, that with respect to some objects of belief, "a man is not bound to
believe explicitly, but only implicitly or in the preparation of the mind, inasmuch as he is ready to believe
whatever is contained in divine scripture; but he is bound to believe this explicitly only when he is certain that it
is contained in the teaching of the faith". This quotation has made for the sake of those who hold the teaching of
Thomas.
[3] Third, it must be noted that there are two kinds of heretics. For some are heretics knowingly, and some are
heretics not knowingly. Those are knowingly heretics who know that they are in conflict with the Christian faith,
such as apostates from the faith who judge that the Christian faith is false. Those are heretics unknowingly who
think that they hold the Christian faith but believe and hold pertinaciously that some faith is Christian which in
truth of fact is not; for there were many heretics who believed that only they were Catholics and that all others
contrary to them were deviating from Catholic truth. This distinction is taken clearly from the words of blessed
Augustine, quoted 6, q. 1, c. Quaero. For he says, "For I ask who sins more seriously, he who runs into heresy
unknowingly, or he who knowingly does not step back from avarice, that is, idolatry? According to the rule by
which the sins of those who know are greater than the sins of the unknowing, the knowingly avaricious man
conquers in crime, but if it happens that the magnitude of the crime itself does as much in the case of heresy as
the admission of the knower in that of avarice, the unknowing heretic may be equated to the knowingly
avaricious man". Here the gloss says upon the word "unknowing", "He is an ignorant heretic who follows an
opinion that he believes to be more true, as [et: ut?] in 24, q. 3, c. Haeresis.
From these [words] it is established clearly that some are heretics knowingly and others unknowingly. That is
also proved, because Arrianus Sabellius and many others were condemned as heretics, but they were not heretics
knowingly, because they thought they adhered firmly to divine scripture and the teaching of the apostles and of
the universal Church, and they believed that they based themselves upon that teaching; therefore they were not
heretics knowingly, in the way apostates falling away from the faith deny the Christian faith and the holy
scripture, saying that it is false and fictitious. The abovementioned, therefore, were unknowing heretics, and
some were knowing.
[4] Fourth, it must be known that those who err against Christian faith by that fact wander away from it. This
happens in two ways, because either [1] they err against a truth they are bound to hold or believe explicitly, as
when someone asserts that Christ did not die, thinking that this does not at all pertain to the Christian faith; and
[2] some err against a truth they are not bound to believe explicitly, as when someone thinks that Christ did not
flee into Egypt. And again this happens in two ways, because [a] some err pertinaciously and are not ready to be
corrected, and [b] some err but are ready to be corrected. These four divisions can be proved by clear examples,
but it seems that they need no proof. And the first kind of persons in error are manifest heretics, and likewise the
second and third, but not the fourth. This could be shown by many clear arguments and authorities, but for the
sake of brevity a single authority will be quoted, by which the above four are proved. It is a text of Augustine,
which is quoted in 24, q. 3, c. Dicit Apostolus. He says: "Those who defend their opinion, though perverse and
false, with no pertinacious animosity---especially one that they did not bring forth by the audacity of their own
presumption, but accepted from elders seduced and fallen into error---and seek the truth with careful solicitude,
ready to be corrected when they find it, are by no means to be counted among the heretics". These words clearly
imply that those who knowingly err against Catholic truth are to be regarded as heretics. For according to the
above words one who errs against faith and is not ready to be corrected is a heretic; but one who is a heretic
knowingly against the faith is not ready to be corrected, because one erring against faith ought to be corrected by
the rule of the Christian faith; therefore whoever regards the rule of faith as false is not ready to be corrected;
therefore he is to be counted among the heretics.
Second, it is proved by the above words that one who errs against a Catholic truth that he is bound to believe
explicitly must be regarded as a heretic, for such a person does not seek the truth with careful solicitude and is
not ready to be corrected. For it is certain that anyone who does not believe what he is bound by necessity of
salvation to believe not only implicitly but explicitly does not seek truth with careful solicitude and is not ready
to be corrected; therefore he is to be numbered among the heretics, according to Augustine's text above.
Third, it is evidently shown from the above text that one who errs pertinaciously against a Catholic truth that he
is not bound to believe explicitly is to be counted among the number of heretics. For one who errs pertinaciously
against a Catholic truth he is not bound to believe explicitly, is shown to be defending [enim: cum?] with
pertinacious animosity a false and wicked opinion, because he is defending pertinaciously a false opinion
contrary to a truth that he is not bound to believe explicitly. On account only of the pertinacity, and not only on
account of the defence, he is counted among heretics. But one who defends with pertinacious animosity a false
and wicked opinion is counted among heretics, according to Augustine. Therefore one who errs pertinaciously
530

