allegare.

seem implausible that even a pope might arrive at such a
huge insanity. For since a pope is not confirmed in faith
(just as no others are), the same point must be contended
in his case as is in that of others as to the possibility of
being converted to the Saracens. Having therefore
presented the suggested exemplary case, proceed to
argue in favour of the aforementioned assertion.
Magister: Quod a papa predicto modo heretico liceat Master: It is shown in many ways that one may appeal
appellare multis modis ostenditur. Primo sic. A papa from a pope who is a heretic as just described. First of all
ipso iure deposito est licitum pro causa fidei appellare. in this manner. It is legitimate to appeal for the cause of
Sed papa diffinitive pronuntians fidem christianam esse faith from a pope who has been deposed by law itself.
falsam et legem sarracenorum esse tenendam est ipso But law itself deposes a pope who definitively
iure depositus. Ergo a tali licet appellare.
pronounces that the Christian faith is false and that the
law of the Saracens must be embraced. Therefore one is
allowed to appeal from such a pope.
Discipulus: De isto modo an scilicet papa hereticus sit Student: I shall inquire in a later context [see 1 Dial. 6.
ipso iure depositus post inquiram, ideo aliam rationem 68-75] about this manner of proving the point, namely
adducas.
whether a heretic pope is deposed by law itself.
Therefore move on to another reason.
Magister: Secunda ratio talis est. Ab omni iudice vel Master: The second reason is this. It is permitted to
pro iudice se gerente qui iudicem habet superiorem licet appeal against the unjust sentence of any judge (or of
contra iniquam sententiam ipsius appellare; sed papa someone functioning in that capacity) who has a judge
diffinitive pronuntians legem christianam esse falsam superior to him. But a pope who definitively pronounces
habet iudicem superiorem, ergo a tali papa licet that the Christian law is false has a superior judge,
appellare. Maior ostenditur auctoritate Iulii pape que therefore it is permitted to appeal from such a pope. The
ponitur 2 q. 6 c. Placuit, qui ait: "placuit ut a major premiss is demonstrated by the authority of pope
quibuscunque ecclesiaticis iudicibus ad alios iudices Julius (recorded in 2 q. 6 c. Placuit) [col. 468] who
ecclesiasticos ubi est maior auctoritas provocatum states: "it has been approved that a hearing will not be
fuerit, audientia non negetur". Ex quibus verbis denied when an appeal has been made from any
colligitur quod a minori auctoritate ad maiorem ecclesiastical judge whatsoever to other ecclesiastical
appellare licet. Minor probatur. Tum quia omnis judges who are endowed with a greater authority". From
hereticus habet iudicem superiorem cum sit minor omni these words one gathers that it is permitted to appeal
catholico (24 q. 1 par. Si autem). Tum quia ecclesia from a lesser to a greater authority. The minor premiss is
universalis est maior papa sicut orbis est maior urbe proved by the fact that every heretic has a superior
(dis. 93 c. Legimus). Tum quia concilium generale est judge, since a heretic is of lesser status than any catholic
supra papam ut notatur in glossa dis.19 c. Anastasius. (24 q. 1 #Si autem) [cols. 967-968], and by the fact that
Tertio sic. Ab illo licet pro causa fidei appellare qui nec the universal church is greater than the pope, just as the
iudex nec testis nec accusator in causa fidei vel alia esse world is greater than Rome (dis. 93 Legimus) [col. 328],
potest. Hoc patet, quia ab illo qui se gerit pro iudice et and by the fact that a general council is above the pope,
tamen iudex esse non potest, licet appellare. Sed papa as notes the gloss to dis. 19 c. Anastasius [col. 87]. Here
pronuntians legem christianam esse falsam non potest is the third reason. It is permitted to appeal for the cause
esse iudex nec testis nec accusator quia est hereticus. of faith from someone who can be neither a judge, nor a
Heretici autem iudices esse non possunt cum nil habeant witness, nor an accuser in a cause of faith or in any other
potestatis aut iuris (24 q. 1 c. Didicimus) nec possunt cause. This is evident, because it is permitted to appeal
esse testes (Extra, De hereticis, c. 1) nec possunt esse from one who functions as a judge and yet cannot be a
accusatores (2 q. 7 c. Alieni et c. Pagani et c. Non judge. But a pope who pronounces the Christian law to
potest). Ergo a papa pronuntiante legem christianam be false can be neither judge nor witness nor accuser,
esse falsam appellare licet. Quarto sic. Ab omni apostata since he is a heretic, and heretics cannot be judges since
qui se pro iudice in causa fidei gerit licet appellare, they possess neither authority nor right (24 q. 1 c.
saltem si aliter causa fidei vitiata sublevari non potest. Didicimus) [col. 977], nor can they be witnesses (Extra,
Sed papa diffinitive pronuntians fidem christianam esse De hereticis, c. 1) [col. 778], nor can they be accusers (2
falsam est manifestus apostata a fide christiana. Igitur si q. 7 c. Alieni [col. 488], and c. Pagani [col. 489], and c.
gerit se pro iudice in causa fidei licet appellare ab ipso. Non potest) [col. 467]. Therefore it is permitted to appeal
from a pope who pronounces the Christian faith to be
false. Here is the fourth reason. It is permitted to appeal
from every apostate who functions as a judge in a case of
faith, at least if there is no other possibility of remedying
a harm done in such a case. But a pope who definitively
pronounces the Christian faith to be false is an obvious
303

