absque fama est salus, et sepe fama est causa perditionis must not be abandoned in order to preserve one's good
eterne. Et ideo qui de perditione fame nimium name. For there can be salvation without reputation, and
contristatur, ut aliquid spectans ad honorem Dei vel reputation is frequently the cause of eternal perdition.
salutem suam vel proximorum obmittat, non est dignus And therefore, he who is overly saddened by loss of
regno Dei. Talis enim cum Apostolo nequaquam propter reputation, and proceeds to renounce something
Christum omnia velut stercora arbitratur, sed gloria pertinent to the honour of God, or to his own or his
vexatur inani, omnia opera sua faciens ut ab hominibus neighbours' salvation, is unworthy of the kingdom of
videatur.
God. Indeed, such a person will never, in emulation of
the Apostle, consider all things as dung for the sake of
Christ, [Philippians 3:8] but desirous of vainglory,
[Galatians 5:26] will perform all of his activities so as to
gain popular attention.
Iterum, impugnator idoneus pape heretici omnem Further, the qualified opponent of a heretic pope will
duplicitatem evitet, ne scilicet facto, verbo vel scripto avoid all duplicity lest, namely, he openly suggests by
patenter ostendat quod ipsum habet pro vero summo deed, word, or script, that he holds the heretic pope to
pontifice. Quamvis enim nonnunquam licitis et utilibus be a true pope. For although at times it is believed
simulationibus uti expediens censeatur, tamen uti expedient to utilize legitimate and useful pretences,
duplicitate que falsitatem includit semper est illicitum nevertheless the use of duplicity which includes
reputandum, teste sapiente, qui Ecclesiastici 2 ait: "ve falsehood is always to be considered illegitimate,
duplici corde et peccatori terram ingredienti duabus witness a wise person who states in Ecclesiasticus 2:
viis".
"woe to him who is of a double heart, and to the sinner
that goeth on the earth two ways". [Ecclesiasticus 2:14]
Sit insuper in prosequendo negotia fidei contra papam Moreover, let the opponent be ardent and not lukewarm
hereticum calidus, non tepidus. Tepidus enim in hoc in pursuing the interest of faith against a heretic pope.
negotio, presertim si est magnus et potens, non For one who is lukewarm in this process, especially if
solummodo de ore Dei evometur, sed etiam pauperibus he is a great and powerful individual, will not only be
et simplicibus sibi adherentibus erit causa et occasio spewed out of God's mouth, but will also become a
confusionis et destructionis, non tantummodo cause and opportunity of disorder and destruction, not
temporalis, sed etiam forsitan spiritualis. Quia si non merely temporal, but perhaps also spiritual, to his poor
ferventer defendit eos, papa hereticus et complices sui and unlearned supporters. For if he does not vehemently
tanquam belue crudelissime ipsos tam spiritualiter quam defend the latter, the heretic pope and his accomplices
corporaliter satagerent trucidare.
will, like beasts most cruel, attempt to exterminate them
both spiritually and physically.
Oportet etiam impugnatores idoneos pape heretici amore It is also proper that opponents of a heretic pope
et concordia fortius adiuvari, ne, si dissensionibus et strongly rely on mutual love and concord, lest, if
contentionibus, odio, emulationibus, et scismatibus divided by disagreements and quarrels, hatred,
disiungantur, facilius desolentur. Quia, teste Salvatore: jealousies, and schisms, they be more easily forsaken.
"omne regnum divisum contra se desolatur et omnis Because, witness the Saviour: "every kingdom divided
civitas vel domus divisa contra se non stabit". Quare against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or
impugnatores pape heretici, quantumcunque iustam house divided against itself shall not stand". [Matthew
causam habuerint, non sperent quod propter ipsos tam 12:25] Therefore the opponents of a heretic pope, no
laudabilem finem accipiant si inter se discordes matter how just their cause, should not expect that they
extiterint dampnabiliter et divisi. Tales enim non sunt de will manage to succeed in accomplishing such a
semine illorum per quos fides orthodoxa exaltabatur, sed praiseworthy goal through their own efforts if damnable
per aliam occasionem Deus causam fidei feliciter discord and division exists among them. For if this is
terminabit.
what they are involved in, then they are not of the seed
of those who had once exalted orthodox faith, and God
will choose another set of circumstances to bring the
cause of faith to a happy conclusion.
Impugnator ergo idoneus pape heretici gloriam propriam Therefore let the qualified opponent of a heretic pope
minime querat, quasi velit quod per ipsum solummodo not seek his own glory, as if wishing that victory be
victoria habeatur, sed gaudeat per quemcunque causa achieved through him alone, but let him rejoice in
fidei licite adiuvetur. Nec facta et consilia minorum whoever legitimately assists the cause of faith. And let
despiciat, quia sepe parvulis revelantur que a sapientibus him not despise the deeds and counsels of lesser people,
et prudentibus absconduntur. Sit consiliativus, assidue for matters are frequently revealed to the simple which
inquisitivus, et interrogativus viarum et modorum are hidden from the wise and the prudent. Let him seek
quibus est contra papam hereticum procedendum. Quia, advice, assiduously investigating and querying the ways
teste Salomone: "erit salus ubi multa sunt consilia". Et and means whereby one ought to proceed against the
quamvis minorum consilia sepe minime sint spernenda, heretic pope. For as Solomon witnesses: "in multitude
487

