Extra, De consanguinitate et affinitate, c. Non debet
[col.703] and in dist. 14, c. Sicut quedam [col.33].
Ex hiis dicunt quod de theologicis in libris canonistarum From these points they say that, if they are excellent,
inventis tam quantum ad memoriam quam quantum ad theologians surpass canonists both with respect to
intellectum theologi, si sunt perfecti, canonistas memory and to understanding (a) of theological matters
excedunt, licet nonnumquam non oporteat theologum found in the books of the canonists, although it is
illorum verborum habere memoriam sub quibus sometimes not necessary for a theologian to have a
sententia pure theologica in capitulo determinationis memory of the words themselves under which a purely
ecclesie explicatur. Quo ad leges autem imperiales que theological opinion is explained in a chapter containing
in libris reperiuntur prefatis, sicut patet 2, q. 6, c. Propter the church's determination. With respect to (b) imperial
superfluam et in aliis capitulis multis sequentibus et laws which are found in the afore-said books, however,
alibi in multis locis, nec quantum ad memoriam nec canonists are not to be preferred to those skilled in the
quantum ad intellectum sunt canoniste preferendi civilis civil law, either with respect to memory or with respect
iuris peritis. Quantum vero ad pure moralia que nulla to understanding, as is clear in 2, q. 6, c. Propter
possunt ratione mutari si universalia sunt, nec in superfluam [col.472] and in many other of the following
memoria nec in intellectu possunt canoniste naturali chapters and in many places elsewhere. With respect to
preditos ratione et in philosophia instructos morali et (c) purely moral matters , however, which can not be
perfectos in scientia rationali excedere quoquo modo. changed for any reason, (i) if they are universal,
De illis vero que particularia sunt et tamen nequaquam canonists can not in any way surpass either in memory
dispensationem recipiunt canoniste maiorem possunt or in understanding those gifted in natural reason,
habere memoriam ac etiam de intellectu eorum instructed in moral philosophy and excellent in rational
promptius iudicare, sed ad alios profundius quia per science. About other matters that are (ii) particular and
priora principia licet tardius et cum maiori labore yet not dispensable, canonists can have a greater
pertinet de intellectu discernere eorumdem . Illa autem memory and can even judge their meaning more readily,
que pure positiva sunt et ex causa poterunt variari although it pertains to others to determine their meaning
canoniste magis memoriter retinent; sed non habent more deeply, although more slowly and with greater
profundius iudicare.
effort, because [they do so] through deeper principles.
However, canonists do retain with a better memory
those things that are (d) purely positive and can be
changed for a reason; but they do not have the power to
judge them more deeply.
Capitulum 9
Chapter 9
Discipulus: ISTAM SECUNDAM opinionem pro parte Student: FOR MY PART I willingly give heed to that
libenter attendo, quia quantum ad illa que dicit de second opinion because it seems that it should be
theologicis et legibus imperialibus ac pure moralibus considered to be completely reasonable with respect to
universalibus videtur omnino rationabilis estimanda. what it says about (a) theological matters, (b) imperial
Sed quantum ad moralia particularia et pure positiva que laws, and (c) universal purely moral matters. But with
in libris solummodo canonistarum sunt tradita, non respect to (d) particular and purely positive moral
apparet probabilitatem habere . Nullus enim, non dico matters passed on only in the books of the canonists, it
profundius sed nec aliquo modo, potest iudicare de illis does not seem to have plausibility. For no one can
que non novit. Cum igitur talia ad notitiam tractatorum judge, I do not say more deeply, but in any way, things
aliarum scientiarum nequaquam pertineant, ad ipsos he does not know. Since such things [purely positive
nullo modo pertinet iudicare de illis. Verumtamen moral particulars] do not pertain to the knowledge of
vellem scire si pro illa assertione rationes alique those who treat of other sciences, therefore, it does not
apparentes valeant cogitari.
in any way pertain to these people to judge them.
Nevertheless I would like to know if any plausible
arguments can be thought of for that assertion.
Magister:: Assertionem prefatam nonnulli ratione et Master: Some people try to prove that assertion by
exemplo probare nituntur. Ratione sic. Scientia superior argument and by example. The argument is as follows.
de traditis in scientia inferiori subordinata sibi certius Concerning things taught in an inferior science
potest et profundius iudicare quam scientia inferior. Sed subordinate to it a superior science can judge more
scientia canonistarum, quantum ad multa moralia certainly and deeply than the inferior science can. But
particularia et que valent variationem recipere, est with respect to many moral particulars which can admit
scientia inferior subordinata theologie, et quantum ad change the science of the canonists is an inferior science
multa talia subordinata est philosophie morali, sicut subordinate to theology, and with respect to many such
particularia subordinantur universalibus. Ergo de talibus matters it is subordinate to moral philosophy, just as
potest theologia et philosophia moralis certius quam particulars are subordinate to universals. About such
canonistarum scientia iudicare.
matters, therefore, theology and moral philosophy can
judge more certainly than the canonists' science can.
13

