Septimo sic: illud collegium hereticari non potest cui
nullus Christianus in hiis que fidei sunt audet resistere
nec contra ipsum fidem catholicam defensare, quia tali
collegio hereticato tota fides periclitaretur; sed collegio
cardinalium nullus audet in hiis que sunt fidei resistere
Christianus nec contra idem collegium aliquid tangens
fidem defendere; ergo collegium cardinalium hereticari
non potest.

A seventh [argument is] as follows. That college can
not become heretical which no christian dares to
resist in matters of faith and against which no
christian dares to defend catholic faith, because if
such a college were to become heretical the whole
faith would be endangered. But no christian dares to
resist the college of cardinals in matters of faith nor
to defend anything touching on the faith against that
college. Therefore the college of cardinals can not
become heretical.

Octavo sic: collegium cardinalium est dignius et
nobilius collegio episcoporum, nam cardinales in
Romana curia episcopis preferuntur; sed collegium
episcoporum hereticari non potest quia collegium
episcoporum succedit collegio apostolorum quod
hereticari non potuit; ergo nec collegium episcoporum
hereticari poterit, et per consequens multo forcius
collegium cardinalium hereticari non potest.

An eighth [argument is] as follows. The college of
cardinals is worthier and more noble than the college
of bishops, for cardinals at the Roman curia are
ranked ahead of bishops. But the college of bishops
can not become heretical because it succeeds the
college of apostles which could not become heretical.
Neither, therefore, will the college of bishops be able
to become heretical; and consequently it is much
more certainly the case that the college of cardinals
can not become heretical.

Nono sic: Illud collegium quod de heresi accusari non
potest nullatenus hereticari potest; sed collegium
cardinalium de heresi accusari non potest, quia non
posset accusari de heresi nisi ab inferioribus; inferiores
autem superiores accusare non possunt secundum
canonicas sancciones; ergo collegium cardinalium de
heresi accusari non potest, et per consequens hereticari
nequit.

A ninth [argument is] as follows. That college which
can not be accused of heresy can not become
heretical. But the college of cardinals can not be
accused of heresy because it could only be accused of
heresy by inferiors and, according to canonical
decrees, inferiors can not accuse superiors. Therefore
the college of cardinals can not be accused of heresy
and, consequently, can not become heretical.

Decimo sic: illud collegium in cuius fide salvantur
simplices hereticari non potest, quia illo collegio
hereticato simplices salvari nequirent; sed simplices
salvantur in fide maiorum; inter maiores autem maximi
sunt cardinales; ergo simplices salvantur in fide
cardinalium, et per consequens collegium cardinalium
hereticari non potest.

A tenth [argument is] as follows. That college in the
faith of which the simple are saved can not become
heretical, because if it did become heretical the
simple would not be able to be saved. But the simple
are saved in the faith of the elders; however cardinals
are the greatest of the elders. Therefore the simple
are saved in the faith of the cardinals and,
consequently, the college of cardinals can not
become heretical.

Capitulum 7

Chapter 7

Discipulus Narra assercionem contrariam cum motivis
suis.

Student: Set out the opposing opinion with the
arguments for it.

That the Cardinals can become heretics
Magister Quidam indubitanter tenent quod collegium
cardinalium in fide est nullatenus confirmatum, sicut
nec collegia monachorum et aliorum clericorum, et ideo
hereticari potest; nec est certum quod numquam contra
fidem errabit, sicut nec est certum quod errabit contra
fidem. Isti assertores hanc assercionem multis
racionibus fulcire nituntur, quarum prima est hec. Nulli
particulari collegio per summum pontificem voluntarie
191

Master: Some people hold it as indubitable that the
college of cardinals has not been confirmed in faith,
just as the colleges of monks and other clergy have
not been, and therefore it can become heretical. Nor
is it certain that it will never err against faith, just as
it is not certain that it will err against faith. Those
who maintain this assertion try to support it with
many arguments, of which the first is this. It ought

