Magister: Respondetur quod cum loquitur de Master: The answer is that when it speaks generally of
defendente delinquentem in genere, debet etiam intelligi someone who defends a criminal, it must also be
de defendente heresim quam tenet papa, quia maius vel understood of someone who defends the heresy held by
non minus peccatum est defendere iniquitatem, cum ille the pope, for it is a greater or no lesser a sin to defend
qui facit, si non esset iniquitas, defendi deberet.
iniquity, when he who commits it would require to be
defended if there were no iniquity involved.
Discipulus: Potestne probari aliter quod huiusmodi Student: May it be proved otherwise that such
defensores heresum quibus papa hereticus irretitur sunt defenders of heresies in which a heretic pope is involved
pena hereticorum plectendi.
must suffer the punishment of heretics.
Magister: Hoc videtur sic posse probari. Consentientes Master: It seems that one may prove this as follows.
eadem pena qua agentes sunt plectendi, quod videtur de Those who consent are to suffer the same penalty as
consentientibus consensu defensionis vel etiam those who commit the act, a point which appears above
auctoritatis potissime debere intelligi. Quod glossa all as needing to be understood of those who consent by
Extra, De officio et potestate iudicis delegati, cap. 1, providing defense or even by providing authority. This
testari videtur, dicens: "in quarto casu auctoritatis, sive seems attested by the gloss to Extra, De officio et
defensionis, magis peccat consentiens defendendo, et potestate iudicis delegati, c. 1 [c. Quia quaesitum, col.
auctoritatem prestando, quam faciens, et magis 158] which states: "in the fourth instance of authority or
puniendus est, 24 q. 3 c. Qui aliorum, et 11 q. 3 c. Qui defense, he who consents by defending and by
consentit". Ergo defendentes modis prescriptis hereticam providing authority commits a greater sin than the doer
pravitatem pena hereticorum sunt plectendi.
of the act, and must receive a greater punishment, 24 q.
3 c. Qui aliorum, and 11 q. 3 c. Qui consentit". [s.v. pari
pena, col. 327] Therefore those who defend heretical
wickedness in the ways described must suffer the
penalty of heretics.
Discipulus: Audivi quorundam sententiam de hiis que Student: I have listened to the opinion of some
factis defendunt hereticam pravitatem. Nunc dic de illis concerning those who defend heretical wickedness by
qui verbo vel scripto defendunt doctrinam erroneam their actions. Now speak of those who defend the
pape heretici.
erroneous doctrine of a heretic pope verbally or in
writing.
Magister: De hiis breviter dicitur quod, si doctrina pape Master: One briefly states about these individuals that,
erronea est talis quod veritatem contrariam illi qui if the erroneous doctrine of the pope is such, that they
doctrinam pape erroneam solis allegationibus verbo vel who attempt to defend the pope's erroneous doctrine
scripto nituntur defendere credere tenentur explicite, only by spoken or written arguments are bound to
tales defensores sunt inter hereticos computandi, quia believe it explicitly, then these defenders are to be
omnis qui negat veritatem quam credere tenetur explicite numbered among the heretics, because everyone who
est inter hereticos numerandus, et pena hereticorum denies a truth which he is bound to believe explicitly is
plectendus. Si vero doctrina pape erronea sit talis quod to be numbered among the heretics, and must suffer the
allegantes pro ea non tenentur credere explicite penalty of heretics. If, however, the erroneous doctrine
contrariam veritatem, qui eam defendunt solummodo of the pope is such that those who argue in support of it
allegando verbis vel scriptis non sunt heretici iudicandi, are not bound to explicitly believe the contrary truth,
nec pena hereticorum plectendi, nisi quomodocunque then they who merely defend it by spoken or written
appareat quod suis allegationibus pertinaciter innituntur. arguments are not to be adjudged heretics, nor must they
Qualiter autem convinci valeant de pertinacia, ex hiis suffer the punishment of heretics, unless it somehow
que tractata sunt supra, libro quarto, debet posse patere. appears that they are pertinaciously attached to their
arguments. And the manner whereby they may be
convicted of pertinacity should be clear from the points
we treated earlier in Book Four.
Discipulus: Ex hac sententia michi sequi videtur quod Student: It seems to me that it follows from this
aliqui allegantes verbo vel scripto pro doctrina pape proposition that some of those who argue verbally or in
erronea sunt censendi heretici, et aliqui a pravitate writing on behalf of the erroneous doctrine of the pope
heretica sunt immunes.
are to be reckoned heretics, while others remain free of
heretical wickedness.
Magister: Conceditur quod hoc potest contingere Master: It is conceded that this may be the case. For it
secundum quod potest accidere quod aliqui tenentur may happen that some are bound to explicitly believe a
credere explicite veritatem contrariam doctrine pape truth which contradicts the pope's erroneous doctrine,
erronee et aliqui eam credere explicite non tenentur, et and others are not bound to believe this truth explicitly.
secundum quod aliqui possunt suis allegationibus And some may adhere to their arguments with
pertinaciter adherere et aliqui possunt eis nequaquam pertinacity while others may not. That is why, in order
pertinaciter adherere. Unde ad cognoscendum qui to know who among those arguing verbally or in writing
461

