etiam in casu illo in quo fuerunt, scilicet si summus mouth, not in terms of our judgment" they explain
pontifex fuerit de heresi diffamatus, a nullo est penitus themselves by stating that "the first see will not be
iudicandus, et ita nec ab ecclesia universali nec a judged by anyone." In these words they openly suggest
concilio generali est papa diffamatus de heresi that a supreme pontiff even in that situation in which
iudicandus quia ex quo ipsi quorum verba approbantur a they were (namely that of a supreme pontiff defamed of
canone minime distinxerunt nec nos debemus heresy) is absolutely not to be judged by anyone. Thus a
distinguere. Secundo probatur eadem assertio per pope defamed of heresy is to be judged neither by the
exemplum de Symacho papa de quo legitur in decretis universal church nor by the general council because the
di. 17 para. Hinc in hec verba: "episcopi vero in synodo very persons whose words are given canonical approval
residentes congregata auctoritate eiusdem Symachi did not make any distinctions here and therefore neither
dixerunt 'Symachus papa sedis apostolice presul ab must we. Secondly, the same assertion is proved by the
huiusmodi opinionibus impetitus quantum ad homines example of Pope Symachus concerning whom we read
respicit sit immunis et liber cuius causam totam Dei these words in the Decretum (at di. 17 para. Hinc)[ col.
iudicio reservamus'". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod 52]: "The bishops meeting in a synod gathered together
Symachus papa iudicio synodi non erat subiectus licet by authority of the same Symachus stated 'Let Pope
fuerit de heresi diffamatus quia ut notat glossa ibidem Symachus the head of the apostolic see assaulted by
iste opiniones quibus fuerat Symachus impetitus causam such opinions, be exempt and free in the eyes of men;
heresis contingebant, ait enim: "primo fuit" scilicet we reserve his entire cause to the judgment of God.'"
Symachus "accusatus de heresi, sed cum appareret One gathers from these words that Pope Symachus was
calumnia accusantis postea fuit absolutus ut hic dicitur". not subject to the judgment of the synod even though he
had been defamed of heresy, because as the gloss notes
in the same context, the opinions by which Symachus
had been assaulted touched on a matter of heresy. Indeed
the gloss states: "at first he" that is, Symachus "was
accused of heresy, but when the accuser's slander
became apparent Symachus was subsequently declared
innocent as is mentioned here." [ s.v. immunis, col. 72]
Capitulum 11
Chapter 11
Discipulus: Ad presens sufficiant iste allegationes pro Student: These representations in support of the
assertione predicta et ideo motiva assertionis contrarie aforestated claim are sufficient. Proceed therefore to
non differas allegare.
outline the reasons for the opposite point of view.
Magister: Quod papa si de heresi diffametur sit Master: Some attempt to show that should a pope be
subiectus iudicio universalis ecclesie nonnulli conantur defamed of heresy he would be subject to the judgment
ostendere. Primo sic. Ille qui potest accusari et iudicari of the universal church. Firstly as follows. One who can
de heresi est subiectus iudicio universalis ecclesie si be accused and judged of heresy is subject to the
fuerit de heresi diffamatus. Papa autem potest de heresi judgment of the universal church should he be defamed
accusari et iudicari (di. 40 Si papa) ergo etc. Secundo of heresy. But the pope can be accused and judged of
sic. Qui potest ab aliquo reprehendi pro heresi est heresy (di. 40, Si papa)[col. 146] . Therefore etc.
subiectus in eadem causa iudicio universalis ecclesie. Secondly thus: he who can be censured for heresy by
Sed papa potest pro heresi ab aliquo reprehendi. Hoc someone is subject in the same cause to the judgment of
probatur per exemplum de beato Petro quem beatus the universal church. But the pope can be censured for
Paulus quia non ambulabat ad veritatem evangelii heresy by someone. This is proved by the example of
reprehendit ad Gal. 2. Ergo papa si fuerit de heresi blessed Peter, whom blessed Paul rebuked because "he
diffamatus iudicio universalis ecclesie est subiectus. was not walking uprightly according to the truth of the
Tertio sic. Minor iudicio superioris est subiectus. Sed gospel" (Galatians 2[:14]). Therefore should a pope be
papa est minor universali ecclesia sicut orbis maior est defamed of heresy he is subject to the judgment of the
urbe ergo etc.. Quarto sic. Nulli corpori sufficienter est universal church. Thirdly: The inferior is subject to the
provisum nisi membra putrida que totum corpus valent judgment of the superior. But the pope is inferior to the
inficere possint abscindi. Sed tota ecclesia militans universal church, just as the whole world is greater than
unum corpus est teste Apostolo ad Rom. 12. Ait: "unum a single city, therefore etc. Fourthly thus: No body has
corpus sumus in Christo". Istius autem corporis papa est been sufficiently provided for unless decaying members
membrum quoddam. Ergo non est sufficienter provisum which might infect the whole body can be amputated.
ecclesie nisi papa possit abscindi per ecclesiam si But the whole of the church militant is one body, as the
hereticam incurrerit pravitatem. Cum ergo Christus non Apostle witnesses in Romans 12[:5]. He states: "we are
defecerit in necessariis ecclesie militanti sequitur quod one body in Christ". And of this body the pope is a
per ecclesiam militantem papa si efficiatur hereticus definite member. Hence the church is not sufficiently
potest abscindi et per consequens si fuerit de heresi provided for unless the pope may be cut off by the
diffamatus iudicio universalis ecclesie est subiectus. church should he fall into heretical wickedness.
Quinto sic. Ille qui est de aliquo crimine denuntiandus Therefore since Christ did not fail to secure necessary
287

