maiori et primo inter suos discipulos quod ei exercendi first among his disciples in such manner as to forbid him
potestatem in alios interdicit dicens: "qui maiores sunt the exercise of power over others, saying "they that are
potestatem exercent in eos, non ita erit inter vos etc." Ex great exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be so
quibus verbis colligitur quod Christus ministro et servo among you etc." From these words one infers that to the
aliorum christianorum potestatem exercendi in alios minister and servant of other Christians Christ forbids
interdicit et ita ab eo iurisdictionem coactivam excludit, the exercise of power over others, and thus excludes
quia inutilis et superflua est iurisdictio coactiva que non coercive jurisdiction from him, because coercive
debet potestatem in maleficos exercere. Cum vero dicis jurisdiction which must not exercise power over
quod iudex temporalis est minister secundum wrongdoers is useless and superfluous. Moreover when
Apostolum respondetur quod male allegas Apostolum you say that a temporal judge is a minister according to
quia non dicit Apostolus quod potestas est minister the Apostle, the answer is that you misunderstand the
subditorum sed dicit quod est minister Dei. Christus Apostle, because the Apostle does not say that "power"
autem voluit quod primus inter christianos esset is the minister of subjects, he rather says that it is the
minister non solum Dei sed etiam aliorum.
minister of God. But Christ wanted the first among
Christians to be not only a minister of God but also of
others.
Discipulus: Probantne aliter quod papa non habet Student: Do they prove in some other way that the pope
iurisdictionem coactivam super alios.
does not possess coercive jurisdiction over others?
Magister: Hoc etiam probant sic. Papa non habet Master: They also prove it as follows. The pope does
maiorem iurisdictionem coactivam quam habuit not have greater coercive jurisdiction than did Christ
Christus cuius est vicarius. Sed Christus non habuit in whose vicar he is. But Christ as a mortal man did not
quantum homo mortalis iurisdictionem coactivam. Tum have coercive jurisdiction, since, to begin with, coercive
quia iurisdictio coactiva sine divitiis vel adiutorio jurisdiction without an abundance of riches or the
habentium divitias convenienter exerceri non potest et assistance of the wealthy cannot be adequately exercised
per consequens inutiliter retineretur. Christus autem and consequently would be uselessly retained. Christ,
omnes divitias necessarias ad iurisdictionem coactivam however, completely abdicated ownership of all
exercendam quo ad dominium penitus abdicavit, victu possessions necessary for exercising coercive
et vestitu contentus. Adiutorio etiam divitum ad eandem jurisdiction, and was content with bare access to food
iurisdictionem exercendam minime utebatur. Ergo and clothing. Nor did he use the help of the rich to
coactivam iurisdictionem in quantum homo mortalis exercise such coercive jurisdiction. Therefore he did not
non habuit. Tum quia, ipso testante, ministrare venit non have coercive jurisdiction as a mortal man. Furthermore,
ministrari ergo non venit iurisdictionem coactivam as he himself witnessed, he came to ministrate and not to
exercere ergo eam non habuit, tum quia Christus opus be ministrated to, therefore he did not come to exercise
quod sibi Pater imposuit, consummavit, ipso testante qui coercive jurisdiction and thus he did not possess it. And
ait Ioh. 17: "opus consummavi quod dedisti michi ut finally, Christ completed the task which God the Father
faciam". Christus autem iurisdictionem coactivam had entrusted to him, as he witnesses when he states in
nequaquam exercuit ergo iurisdictionem coactivam a John 17[:4] : "I have finished the work which Thou
Patre non accepit inquantum erat homo mortalis, quia si gavest me to do". Yet Christ by no means exercised
eam accepisset et nequaquam exercuisset de malitia vel coercive jurisdiction, therefore he did not as a mortal
negligentia fuisset merito arguendus quia officium sine man receive coercive jurisdiction from God the Father,
opere tenuisset.
because had he received it and never exercised it, he
might justly have been accused of wicked conduct or
negligence, since he would have held an office without
performance.
Discipulus: Hic errant aperte quia evangelica testatur Student: In this instance they are clearly wrong, because
historia quod Christus iurisdictionem exercuit the Gospel story witnesses that Christ exercised coercive
coactivam cum Christus de templo vendentes et ementes jurisdiction when he violently expelled buyers and
violenter eiecit ut legitur Matth. 21 Mar. 11 Luc. 19 et sellers from the temple, as we read in Matthew 21[:12],
Joh. 2.
Mark 11[:11], Luke 19[:45], and John 2[:15].
Magister: Ipsi asserunt te hic errare propter duo. Primo Master: They contend that it is you who are wrong here,
quia eiicere vendentes et ementes de templo et alia and for two reasons. First: because to expel buyers and
facere que tunc Christus exercuit ad iurisdictionem sellers from the temple and to do the other things which
coactivam non pertinent, nec Christus tunc officium Christ performed at that time are matters not relevant to
prelati vel summi sacerdotis exercuit sed officium coercive jurisdiction. On that occasion Christ did not
hostiarii tunc assumpsit teste Magistro Sententiarum qui exercise the function of a prelate or high priest but
ut habetur libro 4 di. 24 ait: "hoc officium, scilicet assumed the office of a janitor, as witnesses the Master
hostiariorum, Dominus in sua persona suscepit quando of the Sentences [Peter Lombard] who states in book 4
flagello de funiculis facto vendentes et ementes de chapter 24 [of the Sentences]: "this office, namely that
templo eiecit. Ipse enim se hostiarium significans dicit of janitors, the Lord assumed in his person when, having
271

