cuiuscunque mortalis. Quare quilibet scire tenetur quod obey a pope who orders that such an appeal or demurrer
in derogationem et subversionem legis divine nulli not be honoured, he is doubting concerning a matter it is
oportet obedire prelato. Tenetur etiam quilibet scire appropriate to know, and concerning which doubt is
quod si non esset deferendum appellationi vel unacceptable. For everyone capable of reasoning is
recusationi huiusmodi antequam constaret eam non esse bound to know that one must favour the divine law over
legitimam, posset legis divine subversio imminere. any mortal whatsoever, and therefore one must become
Posset enim libere papa hereticus absque resistentia actively involved to a higher degree in a situation where
legem divinam subvertere, et introducere sectam danger threatens the divine law than where it threatens
catholice fidei adversantem, quare quilibet scire tenetur any mortal man whatsoever. Thus, everyone is bound to
quod tali precepto est minime obediendum. Et ideo si know that it is inappropriate to obey any prelate
dubitans obediat, a peccato minime excusatur quia whatsoever to the prejudice and subversion of the divine
dubitat ubi dubitare non debet.
law. Everyone is also bound to know that if such an
appeal or demurrer did not have to be honoured before
its illegitimacy was confirmed, the subversion of divine
law might become an imminent threat. For a heretic pope
might freely subvert the divine law with no resistance
being offered, and establish a sect inimical to the
catholic faith. That is why everyone is bound to know
that such a command must not be obeyed. And therefore
if the doubter obeys it he is not excused from sin,
because he is doubtful where he must not doubt.
Discipulus: Omnino videtur irrationabiliter dictum quod Student: It seems totally unreasonable to say that
quilibet tenetur scire quod tali precepto pape non sit everyone is bound to know that such a command of the
obediendum, cum pauci vel nulli hoc teneant. Ea autem pope must not be obeyed, since few or none hold this
que quilibet scire tenetur noscuntur esse communia position. But the matters that everyone is bound to be
quedam que paucis sunt ignota. Ergo non quilibet aware of are understood to be points of common
tenetur scire quod non est obediendum tali precepto knowledge, of which few are ignorant. Therefore not
summi pontificis. Quod etiam ratione videtur posse everyone is bound to know that one must not obey such
probari, quia spectantia ad mores que quilibet scire a command of the supreme pontiff. This also appears
tenetur vel pertinent ad ius naturale vel ad ius divinum. capable of being proved by the following reason.
Ea vero que sunt de iure positivo non quilibet scire Propositions relevant to morals which everyone is bound
tenetur. Sed non obedire tali precepto non pertinet ad ius to know pertain either to natural law or to divine law,
naturale, quia tunc naturaliter esset notum, nec spectat while those propositions which stem from positive
ad ius divinum quia ius divinum in scripturis sacris [human] law not everyone is bound to know. But not to
habetur. In tota autem scriptura divina nulla de hoc fit obey such a command does not pertain to natural law
mentio, ergo non spectat ad ius divinum.
because in that case it would be naturally known; nor
does it pertain to divine law, because divine law is
contained in the Scriptures, and there is no mention of
this proposition in the whole of Holy Writ, therefore it
does not pertain to divine law.
Magister: Respondetur quod sicut natura humana est Master: The answer is that just as human nature has
corrupta per peccatum, ita etiam cognitio humana in been corrupted by sin, so likewise in many people
multis per varia vitia quo ad multa penitus est amissa, et human understanding has been completely lost as to
ideo si nulli vel pauci tenent quod non est obediendum many matters due to the operation of various vices. And
tali precepto pape hoc ex corruptione accidit vitiorum. therefore if none or few hold that one must not obey
Pauci enim vel nulli inveniuntur qui velint pro veritate such a precept of the pope, this is due to the corruption
indignationem incurrere summi pontificis. Si autem of vices. For few people or none at all are to be found
summus pontifex hoc teneret, omnes vel multi de hoc who are willing to incur the wrath of the supreme pontiff
nullatenus dubitarent. Si etiam vellent ad conscientiam for the sake of truth. If on the other hand the supreme
suam recurrere, invenirent esse tenendum quod nulli pontiff were to hold this, all or many would hardly
mortali est obediendum in subversionem legis divine, et harbour any doubts about it. But if they had the will to
per consequens quod tali precepto pape cum possit esse consult their consciences, they would discover the
in subversionem legis divine non est obediendum obligatory position that no mortal is to be obeyed in
quoquo modo.
subversion of the divine law, and consequently that one
must in no way obey such a command of the pope since
it may be in subversion of the divine law.
Cum vero dicis quod spectantia ad mores que quilibet However, when you say that propositions relevant to
scire tenetur, vel pertinent ad ius naturale vel ad ius morals that everyone is bound to know pertain either to
divinum, dicitur quod verum est aliquo modo. Quia vel natural law or to divine law, one agrees that this is true
357

