peccat, qui videt quam maliciose, ex quo legitime est
correctus, appellat.

punished by the church. He also sins before God, who
sees how maliciously he appeals, because he has been
legitimately corrected.

Capitulum 18

Chapter 18

Discipulus Una obiectio quae totum processum
praedictum videtur infligere mihi occurrit. Nam cum
dicunt isti quod correctus legitime a praelato tenetur
errorem revocare, et aliter non, quaeritur ab eis aut
errans tenet haeresim damnatam explicite aut tenet
errorem damnatum duntaxat implicite.

Student: An objection occurs to me which seems to
strike against the whole preceding argument. For
when these people say that someone corrected
legitimately by his prelate is bound to retract his
error, and otherwise is not, one can ask of them
whether the one erring holds an explicitly condemned
heresy or holds an error condemned only implicitly.

Si tenet haeresim damnatam explicite eam statim
revocare tenetur, alioquin poterit eum suus praelatus
debitae subdere ultioni. Si autem tenet haeresim
damnatam duntaxat implicite, non tenetur eam pro
quacunque correctione praelati inferioris summo
pontifice revocare.

If he holds an error condemned explicitly he is bound
to retract it at once, otherwise his prelate could
subject him to due punishment. If he holds a heresy
condemned only implicitly, however, he is not bound
to retract it on account of any correction by a prelate
inferior to the highest pontiff.

Magister Ad hoc respondent quod non tenetur quis
statim revocare haeresim damnatam explicite quando
ignorat eam esse damnatam explicite. Sed si sibi
ostenditur quod est damnata explicite statim eam
revocare tenetur. Cum vero dicis quod praelatus potest
talem errantem debitae subdere ultioni, verum est
ordinem debitum servando, puta ut primo per regulam
fidei ostendat erranti quod error suus catholicae obviat
veritati, et si tunc errorem nequaquam revocaverit,
ipsum poena digna percellat.

Master They reply that no one is bound to retract
immediately an explicitly condemned heresy when he
does not know that it has been explicitly condemned.
But if it is shown to him that it has been explicitly
condemned he is bound to retract it immediately.
Now when you say that a prelate can subject such an
erring person to due punishment, this is true provided
due order is observed. For example, by the rule of
faith let him first show someone erring that his error
conflicts with catholic truth; and if he does not then
retract his error, let him (the prelate) strike him with
the appropriate punishment.

Capitulum 19

Chapter 19

Discipulus Miror quod isti dicunt tenentem haeresim
damnatam explicite non debere statim, quamvis
correctus fuerit a praelato, eandem haeresim revocare.
Hoc enim Scripturae Divinae, sacris canonibus,
consuetudini ecclesiae et rationi repugnare videtur.

Student I wonder that they say that someone holding
an explicitly condemned heresy does not have to
retract that heresy at once even if he has been
condemned by a prelate. This seems to be contrary to
(i) divine scripture, (ii) sacred canons, (iii) the custom
of the church, and (iv) reason.

Quod enim hoc Scripturae Divinae repugnet probatur.
Nam omnis haereticus tenetur suam haeresim revocare;
qui autem tenet haeresim damnatam explicite est
haereticus; ergo talis statim tenetur de necessitate
salutis haeresim revocare.

(i) For that this is contrary to divine scripture is
proved. For every heretic is bound to revoke his
heresy; he who holds an explicitly condemned heresy,
however, is a heretic; such a person is immediately
bound, therefore, of necessity for salvation to retract
his heresy.

Maior est manifesta, quia qui non tenetur suam
haeresim revocare non tenetur eam dimittere, et per
consequens non peccat, saltem mortaliter, tali haeresi
adhaerendo, ex quo sequitur quod non est haereticus.

The major [premise] is obvious because whoever is
not bound to retract his heresy is not bound to put it
aside and, as a consequence, does not sin, at least not
mortally, by clinging to such a heresy; from this it
follows that he is not a heretic.

134

