Qui consentit". [col. 1683] We are given to understand
from these words that the receivers of heretics commit a
more serious crime than the heretics, and must suffer a
similar punishment.
Alia est opinio quod illi qui solummodo sunt There is another opinion, that those who are merely
receptatores hereticorum et non approbant errores receivers of heretics and do not approve of their errors
eorum, licet timore vel cupiditate tracti aut ex aliqua (even if, motivated by fear or cupidity or by some other
causa mala eos nolunt de terra sua fugare nec etiam wicked reason, they refuse to expel the heretics from
detinere, non sunt heretici reputandi, nec sunt quoad their land or even to place them under arrest), are not to
omnia pena hereticorum plectendi, quia legitime be reckoned heretics, nor suffer in all respects the
sanctiones inter hereticos et receptatores hereticorum punishment of heretics, because legitimate legal rules
expresse distinguunt, et taxantes penam receptatorum expressly distinguish the status of heretics from that of
hereticorum moderatiorem penam infligunt, sicut patet receivers of heretics, and inflict a lesser punishment on
Extra, De hereticis, Excommunicamus 1, # Credentes. receivers of heretics when assigning penalties. This is
Hoc etiam ex eodem capitulo # Moveantur colligitur made clear in Extra, De hereticis, Excommunicamus 1, #
evidenter, ubi sic legitur: "si vero dominus temporalis, Credentes. [col. 788] This is also evidently gathered
requisitus et monitus ab ecclesia, suam terram purgare from the section Moveantur in the same chapter, where
neglexerit ab heretica feditate, per metropolitanum et we read as follows: "if, however, the temporal lord,
ceteros conprovinciales episcopos excommunicationis asked and warned by the church, should neglect to
vinculo innodetur, et, si satisfacere contempserit infra cleanse his land of heretical filth, he shall be involved in
annum significetur hoc summo pontifici, ut ex tunc ipse a bond of excommunication by the metropolitan and the
vasallos ab eius fidelitate denunciet absolutos, et terram other bishops of the province, and, should he scorn to
exponat catholicis occupandam, qui eam, exterminatis give satisfaction within a year, notification of this shall
hereticis, absque ulla contradictione possideant". Ex be made to the supreme pontiff, so that he might as of
quibus verbis datur intelligi quod dominus temporalis, that moment proclaim that the lord's vassals are released
licet sit receptator hereticorum, utpote quia quamvis from fidelity to him, and explain that the lord's land is
requisitus et monitus ab ecclesia terram suam non purgat there for catholics to occupy, who, having exterminated
ab heretica pravitate, non est statim ab omni pena the heretics, may possess it without any impediment".
hereticorum plectendus, quia bona sua sunt statim [col. 788] We are given to understand from these words
minime publicanda, nec terra sua est ab aliis catholicis that a temporal lord, even if he is a receiver of heretics
occupanda, quam tamen penam heretici ipso facto (for instance, because although asked and warned by the
incurrunt, quia hereticus etiam occultus de iure nichil church he does not cleanse his land of heretical
possidet (dis. 8 Quo iure).
wickedness), is not to suffer immediately every
punishment due to heretics, since his properties are not
to be immediately confiscated, nor is his land to be
occupied by other catholics, a punishment, on the other
hand, which heretics incur ipso facto; for a heretic, even
if occult, legally possesses nothing (dis. 8, Quo iure).
[col. 12-13. Cf. gloss s.v. nam iure divino, col. 22]
Discipulus: Ista secunda opinio magis videtur michi Student: This second opinion appears to me to be more
consona statutis sanctorum patrum, ideo quomodo ad in tune with the statutes of the holy fathers, therefore
glossam que videtur esse in contrarium respondetur declare how one responds to the gloss which seems to
declara.
contradict it.
Magister: Dupliciter respondetur. Uno modo, quod Master: The answer is twofold. One approach is to state
glossa non est autentica, et aperte veritati repugnat, ideo that the gloss is not authentic, and that it openly
est neganda. Nec videtur inconveniens negare glossas contradicts the truth, therefore it must be rejected. Nor
decretorum, cum etiam ipse textus decretorum aperte does it seem inconvenient to negate the glosses of canon
negetur eo quod in textu assertiones erronee inserantur. law, since the very text of such law may be openly
Sicut patet 23 q. 4 # Sed obiicitur, ubi narrat Gratianus, denied when erroneous assertions are included therein.
quod tempore Achab missi fuerunt duo quinquagenarii This is clear from 23 q. 4 # Sed obicitur, [Gratian,
ad Helyam qui dicerent: "homo Dei, rex Israel vocat te". dictum post c. 29, col. 913] where Gratian tells the story
Quod tamen est heresis explicite condempnata, quia that in the time of Achab, two fifty-year old men were
contraria veritas est explicite approbata, videlicet, quod sent to the prophet Elias with this message: "man of
hoc accidit tempore Ochozie, mortuo rege Achab, quia God, the king of Israel summons thee". [2 Kings 1:9]
in scriptura divina invenitur expresse, et ipse Gratianus, The story, however, is an explicitly condemned heresy,
si dicto illo pertinaciter adhesisset, fuisset hereticus because the contrary truth is explicitly approved,
manifestus. Si ideo non fuit hereticus, hoc accidit quia namely, that this event occurred in the time of Ochozias,
ex sola ignorantia absque omni pertinacia dixit after the death of king Achab, for this is explicitly found
predictam heresim opinando, quod sibi ex hoc contingit in Holy Writ, and Gratian himself, had he pertinaciously
472

