Innocent III attests in Extra, De accusationibus, c.
Qualiter and quando [col.745], where he clearly asserts
that canonical ordinances sprang at a later date from the
texts of the New and Old Testaments. Therefore
although I could ask many [questions] about these
matters, yet because canonists, being ignorant of the
terms of other sciences, would not understand them, I
want you in this work to avoid as much as you can terms
which are proper to sciences other than theology and the
science of the canonists so that canonists may
understand everything. Let what has been said about this
matter suffice, therefore. I am not solicitous for you to
reply to the arguments for the first opinion because they
now seem to me very weak and it is clear enough from
the above how a reply can be made to them.
Magister:: Considero quod si predictam materiam Master: I consider that if you were to investigate the
exquisitius indagares, ad multas assertiones quas above material quite carefully you could easily be
aliquando falsissimas reputasti posses faciliter inclinari. favourably disposed to many assertions which you once
Unde si aliquid circa predicta adhuc animum tuum regarded as completely false . So if anything concerning
angit , si placet tibi propone.
the above matters still vexes your mind, put it forward if
you wish to.
Capitulum 11
Chapter 11
Discipulus: SI CIRCA PRAEDICTA omnia que volvo Student: IF I WERE to put forward to you everything
in animo tibi proponerem et tu ad omnia responderes about the above matters that I am reflecting on in my
sicut cepisti, librum maximum faceremus . Ideo illis mind, and you were to reply to it all in the way you have
omissis ad aliam interrogationem memoratis annexam begun, we would produce a very large book. So putting
accedo . Sepe audivi quod assertio alicuius est catholica, those things aside I come to another question linked to
ipse tamen non est catholicus, et nonnumquam assertio those discussed above. I have often heard that someone's
alicuius hereticalis ostenditur , et tamen ipse inter assertion is catholic, yet he himself is not catholic, and
hereticos minime computatur. Ex quo videtur quod ad that sometimes someone's assertion is shown to be
alios poterit pertinere que assertio est catholica et que heretical and yet he himself is not counted among the
heretica iudicare et ad alios quis hereticus et quis heretics. It seems from this that it can pertain to some
catholicus est censendus discernere.Quamobrem people to judge what assertion is catholic and what
interrogo an ad theologos vel canonistas spectet inter heretical and to others to determine who should be
hereticos et orthodoxos discernere.
considered a heretic and who a catholic. For this reason
I ask whether it pertains to theologians or to canonists to
distinguish between those who are heretical and those
who are orthodox.
Is it for canonists, or for theologians, to decide who is a heretic?
Magister:: Aliqui canoniste sentire videntur quod ad Master: Some canonists seem to think that it pertains
ipsos principaliter spectat inter hereticos et catholicos chiefly to them to judge between heretics and catholics.
iudicare. Pro qua opinione potest sic argui. Ad illos For that opinion it can be argued as follows. To
principalius spectat diiudicare hereticos, et per distinguish heretics, and consequently to judge between
consequens inter hereticos et catholicos iudicare , qui de catholics and heretics, pertains more chiefly to those
hereticis exquisitius et magis ex intentione considerant; who reflect on heretics more carefully and with more
huiusmodi sunt canoniste. Unde et in libro decretalium deliberation. Such people are the canonists. Thus a
specialis titulus satis prolixus de hereticis est insertus; in sufficiently long special title on heretics has been
decretis etiam de hereticis sepe diffuse tractatur. In inserted in the book of Decretals. There is also
theologia autem de hereticis raro fit mentio. Unde et treatment, often copious, of heretics in the Decretum.
nomen heretici in uno loco solummodo Biblie, scilicet However, mention is rarely made of heretics in
ad Titum 3 invenitur. Quare ad canonistas principaliter theology. Thus the word "heretic" is found in only one
pertinet hereticos secernere ab orthodoxis.
place in the bible, namely in Titus 3[:10]. It pertains
chiefly to canonists, therefore, to separate heretics from
the orthodox.
Sed alii opinionem predictam reputant omnino falsam, But others regard the above opinion as completely false,
dicentes quod ad theologos spectat quis reputari debeat saying that it pertains to theologians to judge who
catholicus, quis hereticus, iudicare, sed canoniste habent should be regarded as a heretic and who a catholic, but
ostendere qua pena, postquam aliquis fuerit factus that canonists have the power to show with what penalty
hereticus, debet secundum canonica iura puniri, someone should be punished according to canon law
17

