ecclesie, iudicio universalis ecclesie si fuerit diffamatus options for the militant church, it follows that the pope
est subiectus. Sed papa potest pro crimine heresis may be cut off by the militant church if he becomes a
denuntiari ecclesie, Christo dicenti Matth. 18: "si autem heretic, and consequently he is subject to the universal
peccaverit in te frater tuus", et post: "si non audierit eos church should he be slandered of heresy. Fifthly thus:
dic ecclesie". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod cum papa one who must be denounced to the church for some
censendus sit frater, ipse potest pro crimine potissime crime is subject to the judgment of the universal church
heresis denuntiari ecclesie, ergo si fuerit de crimine should he be slandered. But the pope may be denounced
heresis diffamatus iudicio ecclesie est subiectus.
to the church for the crime of heresy. Christ stated in
Matthew 18[:15,17]: "moreover if thy brother shall
trespass against thee", and then: "if he shall neglect to
hear them, tell it unto the church". From these words one
gathers that since the pope is to be viewed as a brother,
he can be denounced to the church for a crime, above all
that of heresy. Therefore should he be slandered of the
crime of heresy he is subject to the judgment of the
church.
Capitulum 12
Chapter 12
Discipulus: De ecclesia universali an sibi summus Student: What you have stated about the universal
pontifex sit subiectus que dixisti sufficiant. Nunc autem church (i.e. whether the supreme pontiff is subject to it)
sententias peritorum de concilio generali, an super is sufficient. Now, if you please, explain the views of the
papam de heresi diffamatum iurisdictionem vel learned about the general council, viz., whether it holds
potestatem obtineat aperire digneris.
jurisdiction or power over a pope slandered of heresy.
Magister: Sunt nonnulli dicentes quod concilium Master: There are a few who say that a general council
generale super papam de heresi diffamatum nullam has no jurisdiction whatsoever over a pope slandered of
habet iurisdictionem omnino, quod pluribus rationibus heresy, which they attempt to show by multiple
nituntur ostendere. Est autem prima ratio talis. Ecclesia arguments. And the first argument is this. The universal
universalis non habet iurisdictionem super papam de church does not have jurisdiction over a pope defamed
heresi diffamatum, sicut nituntur per rationes prius of heresy, a point they attempt to show by reasons
adductas ostendere. Ergo multo fortius concilium presented earlier [1 Dial. 6.10]. Therefore all the more
generale non habet iurisdictionem super papam de compellingly does the general council not have
heresi diffamatum. Secundo sic. Nulla congregatio jurisdiction over a pope defamed of heresy. Secondly
specialis in quacunque causa habet iurisdictionem super thus: there is no case where a special congregation
papam, cum in omni causa quelibet congregatio possesses jurisdiction over the pope, since whatever
particularis papa inferior sit censenda. Concilium autem congregation is particular must be deemed inferior to the
generale est quedam congregatio particularis seu pope in any case. But the general council is a certain
specialis, quia omnes christianos minime comprehendit. special or particular congregation because it does not
Ergo concilium generale non habet iurisdictionem super include all Christians. Therefore the general council
papam. Tertio sic. Illa congregatio que potest contra does not have jurisdiction over the pope. Thirdly thus:
fidem errare non habet iurisdictionem super papam de that congregation which can err against the faith does
heresi mendaciter diffamatum. Generale autem not have jurisdiction over a pope falsely accused of
concilium potest contra fidem errare, sicut nonnulli per heresy. But the general council can err against the faith,
plures rationes probare nituntur, ergo etc. Quarto sic. as a number [of scholars] attempt to prove by many
Illa congregatio que in causa heresis est inferior papa arguments [1 Dial. 5.25]. Therefore etc. Fourthly thus:
etiam de heresi diffamato non est in eadem causa papa that congregation which is inferior to the pope in a case
superior. Sed totum concilium generale preter papam est of heresy even if he himself is defamed of heresy, is not
in causa heresis papa inferius, quia si totum concilium superior to the pope in the very same case. But the entire
generale preter papam etiam de heresi mendaciter general council minus the pope is inferior to the pope in
diffamatum contra fidem erraret ipse omnes de iure a case of heresy, because if the entire general council
punire deberet. Ergo in causa heresis papa concilio minus the pope (even one falsely slandered of heresy)
generali est superior.
were to err against the faith, the pope would have the
lawful duty of punishing them all. Therefore in a case of
heresy the pope is superior to the general council.
Discipulus: Totum concilium generale preter papam Student: The entire general council minus the pope
non potest contra fidem errare quia Deus qui promisit cannot err against the faith, for God, who promised that
fidem catholicam usque ad finem seculi duraturam non the catholic faith would last until the end of time, would
permitteret.
not allow it.
Magister: Ista responsio impugnatur, tum quia esto Master: This answer they impugn. To begin with,
quod totum concilum generale preter papam erraret because even if the entire general council minus the
nequaquam fides christiana desineret, quia salvaretur in pope were to fall into error, the Christian faith would by
288

