sit rex vel episcopus aut talis opinionis et fame quod moment of his appeal or demurrer and the sort of person
contra personam non possit exceptio legitima allegari. against whom nothing can be objected; indeed assume
Nec propter quartum est tali appellationi vel recusationi him to be a king, or a bishop, or of such reputation or
minime deferendum, tum quia sicut probatum est, tali fame that no legitimate exception can be leveled against
appellanti vel recusanti non potest currere tempus, cum his person. Nor does the fourth option entitle one to
non sit simpliciter necesse appellare pro tali causa, tum refrain from honouring such an appeal or demurrer,
quia ponatur quod infra tempus statutum a iure appellet because, as was demonstrated, [1 Dial. 6.24, 30]
vel recuset et appellationem vel recusationem prescription cannot run against an appellant or someone
prosequitur. Nec propter quintum est tali appellationi entering a demurrer, since it is normally unnecessary to
vel recusationi minime deferendum. Tum quia in hoc appeal for such a cause, and because one may assume
casu in favorem fidei christiane non est necesse servare that the appeal is made or the demurrer entered within
subtilitates iuris, tum quia ponatur quod talis appellans the time frame specified by law, and subsequently
vel recusans nichil de contingentibus et subtilitatibus followed through. Nor does the fifth option entitle one to
iuris obmittat. Patet igitur quod nulla ratio potest refrain from deferring to such an appeal or demurrer,
allegari quare tali appellationi sit minime deferendum, because in this case the Christian faith is privileged in
quia nec ex parte cause assignate, nec ex parte that it is unnecessary to observe the subtleties of the law,
appellantis, nec ex parte persone a qua appellatur, nec and because one may assume that the appellant in
ex parte temporis, nec ex parte forme appellationis. Et question or the person who enters a demurrer does not
ita dicendum est secundum istos quod tali appellationi omit any of the subtleties and contingencies of the law. It
seu recusationi est deferendum omnino.
is thus clear that no reason can be argued as to why one
ought not to defer to such an appeal. There is no reason
from the perspective of the cause alleged, nor is there
one from that of the appellant, nor from the point of view
of the person from whom the appeal is made, nor from
the perspective of the time frame, nor from that of the
form of the appeal. And so it must be stated according to
these theorists that such an appeal or demurrer is to be
completely honoured.
Discipulus: Potest dici quod ratio potest reddi quare tali Student: One could say that a reason might be offered as
appellationi seu recusationi est minime deferendum ex to why such an appeal or demurrer must not be honoured
parte cause, quia causa est falsa, eo quod papa est from the perspective of the cause: since the cause is
catholicus secundum casum.
false, in that according to this case the pope is a catholic.
Magister: Ista responsio frivola reputatur, quia falsitas Master: This is deemed to be a frivolous response,
cause non impedit quominus appellationi vel recusationi because the falsity of the cause hardly prevents the
sit deferendum antequam falsitas sit probata vel offerens obligation of honouring an appeal or demurrer before
se probaturum causam in probatione defecerit. Aliter this falsity is demonstrated or before one offering to
enim nunquam esset aliqua appellatio reprobanda cui prove the cause will have failed in the task. For
iudex vel alius rationabiliter detulisset, quod tamen otherwise no appeal which had been reasonably deferred
constat esse falsum. Si enim iudex iustam contra to by a judge or someone else could ever be rejected, and
aliquam profert sententiam, si ille duxerit appellandum this is surely a false contention. If indeed a judge
allegans quod sententia est iniqua, iudex quamvis sciat pronounces a just sentence against someone and that
appellationem esse iniquam et causam esse falsam, quia someone decides to appeal by claiming that the sentence
tamen adhuc non est probata causa esse falsa, nec dum is unjust, then the judge must defer to the appeal even
appellans in probatione defecit, iudex appellationi sue though he knows the appeal is unjust and the cause is
deferre tenetur, qui tamen postquam de iniqua false, because the latter has not yet been demonstrated to
appellatione fuerit convictus exigente iustitia est be false in the context of the appeal, nor has the
graviter puniendus.
appellant as yet failed to provide the needed proof. But
once the appellant shall have been convicted of issuing a
criminal appeal, justice demands that he be severely
punished.
Discipulus: Alias rationes adducas.
Student: Resume the presentation of further reasons on
behalf of the main point we are discussing.
Magister: Quarta ratio pro assertione predicta talis est. Master: A fourth reason for the assertion under scrutiny
Illius appellationi vel recusationi est deferendum qui is this. One must defer to the appeal or demurrer of a
appellat vel recusat ex causa que si esset probata deberet person who appeals or enters a demurrer for a cause
legitima reputari, cuius accusatio et testimonium contra which would have to be considered legitimate if proved,
superiorem in eadem causa debet admitti. Sed qui and whose accusation and testimony against a superior in
voluerit papam de supradicta heresi accusare vel contra the same cause must be admitted in court. But if
eum testificari, si alias est persona idonea, eius est someone wanted to accuse the pope of the
352

