Working methods
7. Scott and Kilcullen will be responsible for Part 3 and Part 1 Books 1-5 inclusive.
Knysh will be responsible for Part 1 Books 6 and 7. Leppin will be responsible for
Part 2. Kilcullen and Scott will be responsible for Part 1 Books 1-5 inclusive and for
Part 3.
8. After initial publication on the Web, editors will check and comment on one another's
work. The editor originally responsible for the section will decide which suggestions
to adopt. All adopted suggestions will be acknowledged in later versions, either
specifically or (if the suggestor agrees) in general terms.
9.

After web publication the editors listed in paragraph 7 will prepare the same portions of the work for
printed publication.
10. The translation will not be published in printed form but only the Latin text. The final version of the
whole web site (text, translations, essays) will be kept permanently available either by the British
Academy or by arrangement with some electronic publisher.

SECTION 2. EDITORIAL CONVENTIONS
11. Footnotes. There will be three series of footnotes. The first will provide the critical
apparatus, the second will provide notes (including references and comments), the
third will provide chapter descriptions cited from the manuscript traditions. Each
series will be printed as a continuous paragraph, not in columns. Historical
information will be given in the introduction or (briefly) in the second series of
footnotes, or in end notes (referred to from the second series of footnotes).
12. Quotations. We will not follow Offler's practice of italicising quotations or borrowed
words. For explicit quotations we will use quotation marks (double outer, single
inner). Significant variations from the modern text will be noted in the second footnote
series, minor variations will not be signalled. Unacknowledged quotations will be
indicated in notes without any signal in the text. (see note 2)
13. Spelling. There are two options between which we have not yet decided. Either (a) we will consistently
use modern Latin spelling, or (b) we will follow the spelling conventions of the earliest manuscripts.
(see note 3) We are still studying the MS conventions. (see note 4) In either case we will follow modern
English punctuation conventions. (see note 5) We will use arabic numerals in the text, as the MSS do.
(see note 6)
14. Language of the apparatus. Offler's language in introductions and in the second footnote series is
English, but in the apparatus he uses Latin. We will use English in the apparatus also. In the apparatus
the English words will be "omitted", "added" "deleted" and "gap"; we will add "(?)"to indicate a
doubtful reading. The function of Latin words such as conieci, supplevi, scripsi, seclusi, correxi, etc., in
Offler's apparatus (see note 7) will be performed by sigla - see below. (see note 8)
15. Editors' sigla: Ki, Kn, Le and Sc (respectively for Kilcullen, Knysh, Leppin and Scott) will be used to
indicate editorial conjectures. Editors' sigla will facilitate clear acknowledgment of help or suggestions
given by one editor to another.
16. Lemmata. In the apparatus there will be a lemma for every variant. (see note 9) Each lemma will be
separated from the variant by "]". For omissions the lemma will be the word or words omitted. For
additions the lemma will be the word immediately before the addition. (see note 10) For transpositions
the lemma will be the words transposed. Transpositions will be treated as substitutions ("ut non] non
ut", not "trs"). Omission dots will be used if the lemma includes more than two words.
17. Witnesses regularly reported and others not. We will select some witnesses, including at least one
from each of the main families, of which all the variant readings will be reported (subject to the clause
on "insignificant variants" below). Other witnesses will be reported only when editors judge them to be
important (this will eliminate a lot of variants due to carelessness, e.g. in Fr); readers will be advised
1003

