autem alii nolunt auxiliari ei, excusatus est.

catholics. If, however, others do not want to help him,
he is excused.
Discipulus: Quid faciet populus ubi moratur papa Student: What should the common people of the
hereticus, si dominus temporalis, quamvis possit, nolit territory where the heretic pope resides do, if the
papam hereticum cohercere.
temporal lord refuses to use force against this heretic
pope even when he can.
Magister: Respondetur quod populus, non obstante Master: The answer is that the populace, regardless of
quod dominus temporalis sit receptator pape heretici, si the fact that its temporal lord is a receiver of the heretic
potest absque dispendio spirituali, debet papam pope, is obligated to use force against the pope (if this
cohercere, ubi sciret papam esse hereticum, puta si papa can be done without spiritual detriment) where it knows
aliquid assereret contra veritatem apud omnes catholicos that the pope is a heretic, for instance if the pope made
divulgatam, utpote si diceret Christum falsum some assertion against a truth disseminated among all
prophetam, vel fidem christianam esse falsam vel catholics, e.g., if he stated that Christ was a false
fictam, aut quod anime reproborum in inferno minime prophet, or that the Christian faith was false or fictitious,
cruciantur, vel aliquid huiusmodi, quod apud omnes or that the souls of the damned do not suffer the torture
catholicos tanquam catholicum divulgatum existit, nec of hell, [an allusion to the Visio beatifica controversy]
esset necesse quod populus in hoc casu consuleret or something of this sort, which is disseminated among
sapientes, nisi forte ad sciendum quomodo deberet all catholics as catholic doctrine. Nor would it be
procedere contra papam hereticum. Non enim populus necessary in this case for the populace to consult
propter
persuasiones,
allegationes,
vel
verba experts, except perhaps to be informed of the manner in
quorumcunque sapientum vel insipientum deberet which it should proceed against the heretic pope. For the
quoquomodo in dubium revocare an papa esset in tali populace must in no way doubt that in such a situation
casu hereticus reputandus, et tanquam hereticus the pope must be considered a heretic, and must be
evitandus ac etiam puniendus. Imo quicunque sapientes, avoided and even punished as a heretic, regardless of
clerici vel laici, qui dicerent papam in tali casu non the convictions, arguments, or words uttered by any, be
debere a populo reputari hereticus, essent a populo they expert or ignorant. Indeed any experts, clerks or
heretici iudicandi.
laymen, who would state that in such a situation the
pope ought not to be considered a heretic by the people,
would themselves have to be adjudged heretics by the
people.
Discipulus: Quomodo potest populus absque auctoritate Student: How can the people attempt any action against
domini temporalis aliquid contra papam hereticum the heretic pope without the authority of the temporal
attemptare, cum populus nullam habeat iurisdictionem lord. After all, the populace has no jurisdiction
omnino, sed in dominum suum omnem iurisdictionem whatsoever, but has transferred all jurisdiction to its
transtulerit.
lord.
Magister: Respondetur quod quamvis populus in Master: The answer is that although the populace has
imperatorem vel regem iurisdictionem transtulerit, transferred jurisdiction to the emperor or to the king, it
iurisdictionem tamen quam habet in favorem fidei nevertheless cannot transfer from itself the jurisdiction
quando papa est hereticus, et manet cum eis et prelati ac which it possesses in favour of the faith when the pope
dominus temporalis nolunt vel non possunt papam is a heretic, and the prelates and temporal lord with
cohercere, a se transferre non potest, nec tali whom the heretic resides either do not want to, or
iurisdictioni renuntiare potest, quia illa iurisdictio cannot, use force against him. Nor can the people
concessa est populo in favorem fidei christiane.
renounce such jurisdiction, because this jurisdiction has
been granted to the people in support of the Christian
faith.
Discipulus: Quo iure habet populus iurisdictionem Student: By what right do the people possess such
huiusmodi super papam hereticum. Non iure divino, jurisdiction over a heretic pope. Not by divine right,
quia de hoc in iure divino nulla fit mentio. Nec etiam since there is no mention of it in divine law. Nor by
iure humano, quia etiam in iure humano de hoc nulla fit human right, because there is no mention of this in
mentio. Nec iure naturali, quia a iure naturali nulla est human law either. Nor by natural right, because no
iurisdictio penitus, eo quod ex iure naturali nullus habet jurisdiction whatever exists by natural law, in that no
super alium potestatem. Natura enim omnes fecit one has power over another by natural right, for nature
equales.
has made all humans equal.
Magister: Respondetur quod quamvis in iure divino Master: The answer is that although no verbal mention
nulla fiat mentio vocalis de iurisdictione huiusmodi, of such a jurisdiction is made in divine law, one
sententialiter tamen hoc ex iure divino et naturali ac nevertheless may deduce its existence in substance from
humano simul colligitur. Nam ex iure divino concluditur a convergence of divine, natural, and human law. One
quod papa factus hereticus est papatu privatus. Ex iure concludes indeed from divine law that a pope who has
autem humano habetur quod pape heretico non est become a heretic is deprived of the papacy. And one
465

