terms.
Prima forma erit ista. Omnis magister erroris est
pertinax et hereticus censendus. Sed omnis non
discipulus veritatis est magister erroris. Ergo omnis non
discipulus veritatis est pertinax et hereticus censendus.

The first form will be this. Every master of error should
be considered pertinacious and heretical; but everyone
who is not a disciple of truth is a master of error;
everyone who is not a disciple of truth, therefore,
should be considered pertinacious and heretical.

Secunda forma erit ista. Omnis non discipulus veritatis
est pertinax et hereticus censendus. Sed omnis non
volens audire veritatem est non discipulus veritatis.
Ergo omnis non volens audire veritatem est pertinax et
hereticus censendus.

The second form will be this. Everyone who is not a
disciple of truth should be considered pertinacious and
heretical; but everyone who does not want to hear the
truth is not a disciple of truth; everyone who does not
want to hear the truth, therefore, should be considered
pertinacious and heretical.

Tertia forma erit ista. Omnis non volens audire
veritatem est pertinax et hereticus censendus. Sed omnis
errans contra fidem qui cum debet et potest renuit
informari de veritate est non volens audire veritatem.
Ergo omnis errans contra fidem qui cum potest et debet
renuit informari de veritate est pertinax et hereticus
censendus. Quae sit conclusio prima et principaliter
intenta bene conclusa et vera si praemisse omnes harum
trium formarum verae sunt.

The third form will be this. Everyone who does not
want to hear the truth should be considered
pertinacious and heretical; but everyone erring against
the faith who refuses to be instructed about the truth
when he should be and can be does not want to listen to
the truth; everyone erring against the faith who refuses
to be instructed about the truth when he can be and
ought to be, therefore, should be considered
pertinacious and heretical. This is the conclusion first
and principally aimed at, well concluded and true if all
the premises of these three forms are true.

Quod facilime videbitur et primum potissime de maiore
prime forme, si per erroris magistrum intelligamus
habituatum in errore per depositionem cuiuslibet
habitus contrarii. Omnis enim talis est pertinax, sicut ex
descriptione habitus et pertinaciae deduceretur. Et patet
ex alio, quia in omni tali magistro erroris ultra
ignorantiam intellectus reperitur malitia in voluntate.
Illa autem malitia voluntatis vel est pertinacia vel non
est sine pertinacia.

This [[that they are true]] will be seen very easily, and
first and most of all, concerning the major [premise] of
the first form, if by master of error we understand one
habituated to error by the putting aside of any habit to
the contrary. For every such person is pertinacious, as
may be deduced from a description of habit and of
pertinacity. And it is clear from another [argument], for
in every such master of error there is found, besides
ignorance of understanding, a wickedness of will. That
wickedness of will either is pertinacity or is not without
pertinacity.

In reliquis vero premissis termini omnes vel sunt
privatim vel privative oppositi vel convertibiles seu
equipollentes vel modum superiorum vel inferiorum se
habentes. Modo quia inter privative opposita, semper
supposita constantia substantii et circa substantium
aptum natum ac in tempore determinato, nullum cadit
medium, sicut ab uno privative oppositorum affirmato
ad reliquum negatum et econtra, vel ab affirmatione
inferioris
convertibilis
vel
equivalentis
ad
affirmationem superioris convertibilis vel equivalentis,
ac a negatione superioris convertibilis vel equivalentis
ad negationem inferioris convertibilis vel equivalentis
valet semper consequentia. Item alterum privative
oppositorum non negatum de reliquo negato, et
negatum de non negato, superius quoque aut
convertibile seu equivalens de inferiori convertibili vel
equivalenti affirmative atque inferius negatum sicque
convertibile aut equivalens de superiori convertibili seu
equivalentis negatis semper vere praedicatur.)

In the remaining premises all the terms are either
privatively opposed or are convertible or equivalent or
are related as superiors or inferiors. Now because
between privative opposites (always supposing
constancy of substance and that it concerns an
appropriate substance and in a determinate time) no
intermediate occurs, just as the consequence is always
valid from one of the privative opposites affirmed to
the other one negated, and vice versa, or from the
affirmation of an inferior, converible or equivalent to
the affirmation of the superior, convertible or
equivalent, and from the negation of a superior,
convertible or equivalent to the negation of the inferior,
convertible or equivalent. Also always truly predicated
are: one of the privative opposites not negated, of the
other negated, and the negated, of the non-negated; also
the superior, or convertible or equivalent, of the
inferior, or convertible or equivalent affirmatively; and
the inferior negated (and thus the convertible or
equivalent), of the superior, convertible or equivalent
negated.)

159

