apostolorum iudex sederit hominum", et parum post: who would say this, where at some time any of the
"stetisse denique lego apostolos iudicandos, sedisse apostles sat as a judge of men", and a little further: "in
iudicantes non lego, erit illud, non fuit". Ex quibus short I read that the apostles had stood up to be judged, I
verbis datur intelligi quod apostoli iudices hominum do not read that they had sat as judges, something yet to
non fuerunt. Ergo beatus Petrus iurisdictionem non be, not something that was". [Marsilius, II.v.3] From
habuit coactivam. Hoc etiam quod apostoli iudices these words we understand that the apostles were not
hominum non fuerunt beatus Gregorius sentire videtur. judges of men. Therefore blessed Peter did not possess
Tractans enim illa verba Apostoli "secularia igitur coercive jurisdiction. That the apostles were not judges
iudicia si habueritis etc." in Moralibus, ait: "hii terrenas of men also appears to be the opinion of blessed
causas examinent qui exteriorum rerum sapientiam Gregory. For commenting on these words of the
perceperunt, qui autem spiritualibus dotati sunt terrenis Apostle, viz. "if then ye have judgments of things
non debent negotiis implicari ut dum non coguntur pertaining to this life" [1 Corinthians 6:4], he states in
inferiora bona disponere valeant bonis superioribus the Ethics: "those who have acquired the wisdom of
deservire". Cum ergo apostoli maximis bonis external things examine earthly causes, but those
spiritualibus fuerint dotati ipsi non erant circa causas spiritually gifted must not be involved in worldly affairs,
hominum et lites aliqualiter occupati, quod glossa super so that by not being forced to manage inferior goods,
illud ad Cor. "secularia igitur iudicia si habueritis etc." they may devote themselves to superior ones".
aperte sentire videtur, ait enim: "contemptibiles id est [Marsilius, II.v.2] Therefore as the apostles were gifted
aliquos sapientes qui tamen sunt minoris meriti with the greatest of spiritual goods, they were not in any
constituite ad iudicandum. Apostoli enim circumeuntes way occupied with the causes and lawsuits of men. This
talibus non vacabant. Sapientes igitur qui in locis appears to be the evident opinion of the gloss on the
consistebant fideles et sancti non qui huc atque illuc following passage in Corinthians "if then ye have
propter evangelium discurrebant talium negotiorum judgments of things pertaining to this life", which states:
examinatores esse voluit". Hiis verbis ostenditur quod " 'set them to judge who are least esteemed' that is to
apostoli causis hominum terminandis minime say, some wise and yet less worthy men. For the apostles
insistebant. Ex quo infertur quod non acceperant on their rounds did not concern themselves with such
iurisdictionem coactivam a Christo, quia omne officium matters. Thus he [Paul] wanted wise, holy and faithful
iniunctum eis a Christo diligentissime perfecerunt.
men who were local residents to be the scrutineers of
such affairs, and not those who traveled hither and
thither for the sake of spreading the gospel". [Marsilius,
II.v.2] These words show that the apostles did not focus
on settling the worldly affairs of men. From which one
deduces that they did not receive coercive jurisdiction
from Christ, because they carried out with utmost
diligence every office imposed on them by Christ.
Discipulus: In scriptura divina habetur aperte quod Student: Holy writ clearly informs us that blessed Peter
beatus Petrus iurisdictionem habuit coactivam cum ex possessed coercive jurisdiction, since he inflicted death
potestate officii Ananiam et Saphiram morti tradiderit, on Ananias and Sapphira by official authority, as blessed
teste beato Gregorio in Dialogo qui, ut recitatur 23 q. 8 Gregory witnesses in the Dialogue (this is recited in 23
c. Petrus ait: "Petrus qui Tabitam mortuam orando q. 8 c. Petrus)[col. 956-957] where he states: "Peter who
suscitavit, Ananiam et Saphiram mentientes morti resuscitated the late Tabita by praying, cursed the lying
increpando tradidit, neque enim orasse in eorum Ananias and Sapphira to their deaths. Nor do we read
extinctione legitur sed solummodo culpam quam that he prayed for their end but only that he inveighed
perpetraverant increpasse.Constat ergo quod aliquando against the fault they had committed. And so it is plain
talia ex potestate exhibentur aliquando ex postulatione that sometimes such effects are the result of power and
dum et istis increpando vitam abstulit et illi reddidit sometimes of prayer, since he both took away the life of
orando". Ex quibus verbis habetur quod beatus Petrus the latter by harshly complaining and gave it back to the
ex potestate usus est iurisdictione coactiva.
former by praying". From these words we gather that
blessed Peter used coercive jurisdiction with authority.
Magister: Ad hoc respondent quod verba Gregorii male Master: To this they answer that you misunderstand the
intelligis. Non enim asserit Gregorius quod beatus words of Gregory. For Gregory does not claim that
Petrus ex potestate officii sui predictos Ananiam et blessed Peter procured the deaths of the aforesaid
Saphiram morti tradiderit. Tunc enim iudex in causa Ananias and Sapphira by the power of his office. In that
sanguinis extitisset, quod universis clericis noscitur case he would have become judge in a capital case
interdictum. Sed beatus Petrus non ex potestate officii which is known to be forbidden to all clerks. But blessed
sed ex potestate faciendi miracula, quam Deus persone Peter procured the deaths of the aforesaid not through
non officio papatus concesserat, morti tradidit the power of office but through the power of effecting
supradictos. Nonnunquam autem facit quis absque miracles, which God had granted to his person and not to
oratione miracula. Et ita ex hoc probari non potest quod the papal office. For sometimes one may effect miracles
274

