unlearned. Therefore even if all the clergy were to
deviate from the faith, faith would not be endangered.
Decimum motivum eorum est tale. Tota multitudo
clericorum non est sanccior nec in fide stabilior quam
fuit collegium apostolorum. Collegium autem
apostolorum tempore passionis Christi erravit in fide.
Ergo et multitudo clericorum potest contra fidem errare.
Dicunt igitur isti quod sicut temerarium est dicere quod
tota multitudo clericorum errabit contra fidem, ita
temerarium est dicere quod tota multitudo clericorum
nec tempore Antichristi nec alio tempore contra fidem
errabit. De nulla enim congregacione, multitudine vel
collegio firmiter est tenendum quod numquam contra
fidem errabit, nisi in quantum hoc potest colligi ex
verbis Christi promittentis apostolis quod fides
catholica est usque ad finem seculi permansura. In
promissione autem illa licet Christus locutus fuerit
apostolis qui erant episcopi non tamen loquebatur
precise pro ipsis sed locutus est pro futuris. Inter illos
autem futuros nullam de clericis fecit specialem penitus
mencionem. Nec verba sua intelligenda sunt de aliqua
multitudine speciali Christianorum, sed de tota
multitudine, quia hec numquam erit vera: tota multitudo
Christianorum errat in fide; sed an hec erit vera: tota
multitudo clericorum errat in fide, nescitur a nobis sed a
Deo qui omnia futura novit. Predicte assercioni
concordat glossa 24, q. 1, c. A recta dicens, "Quero de
qua ecclesia intelligis quod dicitur quod non possit
errare." Respondens ait, "Respondeo quod ipsa
congregacio fidelium hic dicitur ecclesia." Ex quibus
verbis colligitur quod congregacio fidelium est illa
ecclesia de qua dicitur quod errare non potest. Ad
congregacionem autem fidelium ita pertinent laici
fideles sicut clerici. Ergo de multitudine clericorum non
debet intelligi quod errare non possit contra fidem.

Their tenth reason is the following. The whole
multitude of the clergy is not holier nor more stable
in faith than was the college of apostles. At the time
of Christ's passion, however, the college of apostles
erred in faith. Therefore the whole multitude of the
clergy too can err against faith. They say, therefore,
that just as it is rash to say that the whole multitude
of clergy will err against faith, so it is rash to say that
the whole multitude of the clergy will not err against
faith either at the time of anti-Christ or at another
time. For about no congregation, multitude or college
should it be firmly maintained that it will never err
against faith, except in so far as this can be gathered
from Christ's words promising the apostles that
catholic faith will remain until the end of the age.
However, although Christ spoke in that promise to
the apostles who were bishops, nevertheless he was
not speaking exclusively of them but he spoke of
people in the future. Among those in the future,
however, he did not make any special mention at all
of the clergy. Nor should his words be understood of
any particular multitude of Christians, but of the
whole multitude, because it will never be true that the
whole multitude of Christians errs in faith, but
whether it will be true that the whole multitude of
clergy errs in faith is not known by us but by God
who knows everything that will happen. The gloss on
24, q. 1, c. A recta agrees with this assertion when it
says [s. v. novitatibus; col.1387], 'I ask of what
church do you understand that it is said that it can not
err.' In response it says, 'I reply that the congregation
of believers itself is here called the church.' We
gather from these words that the congregation of
believers is that church of which it is said that it can
not err. The faithful laity, however, belong to the
congregation of believers in the same way as the
clergy. It should not be understood of the multitude
of the clergy, therefore, that it can not err against
faith.

Capitulum 30

Chapter 30

Discipulus Pro ista assercione quam extimo falsam satis
allegasti. Ideo queso ut pro assercione contraria aliquas
allegaciones adducas.

Student: You have brought forward enough
arguments for that assertion, which I consider false.
Therefore I ask you to bring forward some arguments
for the opposite assertion.

That all the clergy can not err
Magister Duo sunt fundamenta principalia contrarie
assercionis, ex quibus sequitur quod multitudo
clericorum contra fidem errare non potest. Primum est
quod ecclesia non potest contra fidem errare. Secundum
quod sola multitudo clericorum est ecclesia.
251

Master: There are two main bases for the opposite
assertion and from them it follows that the multitude
of clergy can not err against faith. The first is that the
church can not err against faith, the second that the
multitude of clergy alone is the church.

