should interpret in the best way those things about
which there is doubt with what intention they were
done, as we find in Extra, De regulis iuris, c. Estote
[col.927], so when we do not know with what
intention someone preaches against the faith, that is
with the intention of clinging to it pertinaciously or
with the intention of correcting himself if he has erred,
we should interpret it in the best way, that is by
supposing that he is ready to be corrected when the
truth is evident to him.
De secundo genere hominum, scilicet de profitentibus
errorem, dicunt quod pertinaces sunt censendi et ideo
sunt haeretici manifesti. Professio enim a voluntate
firmata solet procedere, et ideo qui profitentur errorem
contrarium catholicae veritati sunt reputandi firmati in
errore. Quare pro pertinacibus sunt habendi. Et ex hoc
sequitur quod omnes iurantes se errorem aliquem fidei
christianae contrarium servaturos et abiurantes
quamcunque catholicam veritatem inter pertinaces et
haereticos manifestos sunt censendi. Sicut enim
professio ita iuramentum et abiuratio voluntatem
supponunt firmatam.

About the second kind of person, that is those
professing an error, they say that they should be
considered pertinacious and therefore are manifest
heretics. For a profession usually proceeds from a will
that has been confirmed, and so those who profess an
error opposed to catholic truth should be regarded as
confirmed in their error. Therefore they should be
held to be pertinacious. And it follows from this that
all those who swear that they will preserve some error
opposed to christian faith and who abjure any catholic
truth should be considered to be among the
pertinacious and the manifest heretics. For like a
profession, so an oath and an abjuration suppose a
strengthened will.

De tertio genere hominum, scilicet qui defendunt
errorem, distinguunt, dicentes quod defendere errorem
contingit dupliciter: uno modo absque assertione
temeraria eo quod tunc ita apparet. Et tales defendentes
errorem sive verbo sive scripto non sunt haeretici
manifesti quia parati sunt corrigi cum invenerint
veritatem. Alio modo defendit quis errorem cum
assertione temeraria et talis est pertinax et haereticus
manifestus.

About the third kind of person, that is those who
defend an error, they make a distinction, saying that it
is possible to defend an error in two ways: in one way,
without [making] a rash assertion, as it then so
appears. And such people who defend an error
whether verbally or in writing are not manifest
heretics because they are prepared to be corrected
when they discover the truth. In another way someone
defends an error with a rash assertion, and such a
person is pertinacious and a manifest heretic.

De quarto et quinto genere, scilicet de convictis et
confessis coram praelatis de haeretica pravitate,
distinguunt, quia ista pravitas potest attendi vel ex
parte ipsorum convictorum vel confessorum vel
solummodo ex parte erroris de quo sunt convicti vel
confessi. Si primo modo sint convicti vel confessi de
haeretica pravitate sunt haeretici manifesti quia tales de
pertinacia sunt convicti vel confessi. Si autem sit
pravitas solummodo ex parte erroris non ex parte
convictorum vel confessorum sic non sunt haeretici
manifesti. Errores enim quos tenuerunt Augustinus,
Hieronymus et Cyprianus, de quibus tactum est supra
et de quibus poterant convinci, pravi fuerunt, ipsi
tamen non fuerunt pravi. Et ideo quamvis de illis
erroribus coram praelatis convicti fuissent vel confessi
haeretici nullatenus extitissent.

[See Significant Variants, para. 13.] About the fourth
and fifth kinds, that is those who before prelates have
been convicted of and have confessed to heretical
wickedness, they make a distinction, because that
wickedness can be reckoned either on the side of
those who have been convicted or have confessed or
only on the side of the error of which they have been
convicted or to which they have confessed. If they
have been convicted of or have confessed to heretical
wickedness in the first way they are manifest heretics
because such people have been convicted of or have
confessed to pertinacity. However if the wickedness is
only on the side of error, not on the side of those who
have been convicted or have confessed, they are for
this reason not manifest heretics. For the errors that
Augustine, Jerome and Cyprian maintained, which
were touched on earlier and for which they could have
been convicted, were bad, yet they themselves were
not bad. And therefore even if before prelates they had
been convicted of or had confessed to those errors,

100

