it could have involved itself in armed resistance.
Ad prelatos autem qui non sunt principes, spectat But to prelates who are not princes, it pertains to oppose
scripturarum testimoniis et sanctis exhortationibus, the heretic pope by citing Scriptures, proferring holy
secularis auxilii brachium invocando, pape heretico exhortations, and requesting the assistance of the secular
obviare. Porro quia reges et principes essent extra arm. Furthermore, because kings and princes would fear
timorem
periculi
quamvis
papam
hereticum no danger in the process of opposing a heretic pope,
impugnarent, multi autem prelati absque periculo while many prelates would be unable to oppose a heretic
temporali papam hereticum impugnare non possent, ideo pope without temporal danger, kings and princes who
reges et principes pape heretico favendo gravius support a heretic pope would sin more seriously than
peccarent quam prelati in periculo constituti. Et etiam prelates threatened by danger. And likewise religious,
religiosi ac predicatores et doctores qui essent extra preachers, and doctors [masters] , who would not be in
periculum quamvis papam hereticum impugnarent, danger if they opposed a heretic pope, would sin more
favendo pape heretico gravius peccarent quam reges et seriously by supporting a heretic pope than kings and
principes, pro eo quod maiorem habent notitiam princes, in that they would possess a better knowledge
veritatis, et ad opera spiritualia , inter que impugnatio of the truth, and because they had obligated themselves
pape heretici non obtinet infimum locum, se artius more strictly to the performance of spiritual deeds,
obligaverunt.
among which opposition to a heretic pope hardly
occupies an insignificant place.
Discipulus: Nunquid sufficit regibus et principibus Student: Is it sufficient for kings and princes to simply
defendere impugnantes papam hereticum.
defend the opponents of a heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod non, quia si non potenter, Master: One replies that it is not. For if, having the
cum potuerint, impugnaverint papam hereticum, sed power to do so, they did not strongly oppose the heretic
solummodo defenderint impugnantes, non erunt calidi pope, but merely defended his opponents, they would be
nec frigidi sed tepidi, et ideo incipiet eos Deus evomere neither hot nor cold but lukewarm, and hence God
de ore suo. Et consimiliter esset iudicandum de regibus would begin to spew them out of his mouth. [Revelation
et principibus si aliquos sequaces viles et pauperes pape 3:16] And a similar judgement must be made with
heretici acriter invaderent, et ipsum papam hereticum respect to kings and princes were they to take harsh
satagerent excusare. Tales enim nequaquam adverterent measures against some poor and insignificant followers
illud Deuteronomi 1: "ita parvum audietis ut magnum of a heretic pope, while attempting to find excuses for
nec accipietis cuiusquam personam quia Dei iudicium the heretic pope himself. For such would hardly be
est". Quod non attendere, quamvis in omnibus iudicibus taking notice of the following remark in Deuteronomy
et potestatem habentibus sit dampnabile, tamen in 1: "ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall
regibus et principibus multo dampnabilius et not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgement is
ignominiosius esse dinoscitur. Acceptio enim persone God's". [Deuteronomy 1:17] To ignore this precept,
pape heretici in regibus et principibus qui eius potentiam while being condemnable in the case of all judges and
temporalem nullatenus pertimescunt, vel contemptui power wielders, is known to be much more
fidei christiane, aut nimis defectu zeli ad fidem condemnable and ignominious in the case of kings and
catholicam, aut avaritie effrenate, vel pusillanimitati, aut princes. And this unwarranted favouritism shown to the
stolide fatuitati, vel alicui alio vitio quod dignitati regie person of a heretic pope by kings and princes who
et principum est probrosum, debet ascribi.
hardly fear his temporal power, should be ascribed
either to contempt for the Christian faith, or to a sad
lack of zeal on its behalf, or to limitless avarice,
pusillanimity, dull stupidity, or some other vice
disgraceful to the royal or princely dignity.
Discipulus: Dic qui inferiores regibus et principibus Student: State who among those inferior to kings and
gravius peccant favendo pape heretico, utrum videlicet princes sin more seriously by supporting a heretic pope,
prelati vel doctores, clerici seculares vel religiosi.
namely, whether it is the prelates or doctors, the secular
clerks or the religious.
Magister: Respondetur quod quo ad aliquid prelati Masters: The answer is that as to certain things,
gravius peccant quam doctores. Quia enim prelati curam prelates sin more seriously than doctors. Indeed, since
simplicium susceperunt, et eos non diligenter informant prelates have responsibility for the spiritual care of the
contra errores pape heretici, quantum ad hoc gravius populace, and do not diligently enlighten it against the
peccant quam magistri qui curam illorum minime errors of the heretic pope, they sin more seriously in this
gerunt. Illi autem qui sunt prelati et doctores gravissime connection than masters who do not have such spiritual
peccant. Ratione autem scientie maioris qua pollent responsibilities. And those who are both prelates and
doctores ultra prelatos simplicis literature, gravius doctors sin most seriously. Further: because of the
peccant doctores quam prelati huiusmodi. Religiosi greater knowledge by which doctors prevail over
autem, ceteris paribus, gravius peccant favendo pape unlearned prelates, doctors sin more seriously than such
heretico quam clerici seculares, inter quos illi peccarent prelates. Again: other things being equal, religious sin
476

