EDITORIAL POLICY
SECTION 1. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
The aims of the project are


to produce a critical edition of the text,



to clarify the history of the composition and transmission of the text as far as possible,




to provide historical and analytic introductions and notes relating to the content of the text, and
to provide an English translation of the text.

We will aim at producing a printed edition of the Latin text comparable with Offler's four
volumes. Drafts of material for the printed volumes, materials relating to the history of the
text too detailed to be included in the printed volumes, and the English translation will be
posted on the Web site, http://www.britac.ac.uk/pubs/dialogus/.
Text
1. Our aim is to produce a text as close as possible to the text Ockham himself intended
to circulate. (see note 1)
2. We will not collate every MS, but we will collate MSS from each of the main groups
or families. In establishing the text we will give most weight to readings well
represented across these groups, dates of MSS, consistency with Ockham's style of
thinking and writing and the logic of the argument, not giving any consideration
automatic preference. In the end an editor must exercise judgment in balancing
conflicting considerations.
3.
4.

We will include 2 Dial. (even though it was not originally written for inclusion in the Dialogus).
We will be guided by the editorial conventions established by H.S. Offler in Opera politica, vols. 1-4,
but we will depart from these where there is some good reason. See below, "Section 2, Editorial
Conventions".

Translation
5. The Latin text will be accompanied on the Web by an English translation (or, in the
case of Part 2, a German and an English translation). Translators will standardise the
translations of important terms and will develop a uniform translation policy. Subject
to this policy, the original translator will be responsible for deciding the final version
of his translation, after receiving comments.
Annotations
6. Texts that Ockham quotes, refers to or uses will be identified in footnotes. There will
be cross-references and explanatory notes. There will be introductions dealing with the
composition and transmission of the text and problems of editing and with the subject
matter of the text.
1002

