utatur officio.

nevertheless to challenge the heretic pope to appear in
court, lest he exercise the papal office to the prejudice of
the appellant and of all catholics.
Discipulus: Hoc ultimo dictum contraria videtur Student: What has just been said appears to involve
includere, nam si licet appellare a papa heretico maxime contradictions. Indeed, if it is permissible to appeal from
liceret appellare ab ipso si aliquo litigante coram ipso a heretic pope, an appeal from him would be allowed
super questione fidei papa contra fidem diffinitivam above all if the pope were to render a definitive
proferret sententiam. Puta si aliquis accusans alium judgement against the faith when someone was legally
quod teneret Christum non fuisse natum de virgine, si appearing before him on a matter of faith. For instance,
papa daret sententiam diffinitivam pro eo, diffiniendo were someone to accuse another of holding the view that
quod Christum non fuit natus de virgine, liceret actori a Christ was not born of a virgin, if the pope gave a
sententia pape appellare. Talis autem appellatio esset definitive judgement in favour of the accused by
appellatio propriissime dicta, quia esset provocatio defining that Christ was not born of a virgin, the accuser
inique sententie querelam continens. Ergo isti non would be allowed to appeal from the pope's sentence.
tantum debent loqui de appellatione largissime sumpta And such an appeal would be a most proper one, because
sed etiam de appellatione strictissime sumpta.
it would be a challenge to an unjust sentence involving a
complaint. Therefore these theorists should speak not
only of an appeal in the widest sense but also of an
appeal in the strictest sense.
Magister: Ista obiectio, ut dicunt, est tam frivola quod Master: They say that this objection is frivolous to the
responsione non eget. Nam quamvis dicant se velle point of not requiring a response. For although they do
loqui de appellatione largissime sumpta, non propter say that they want to speak of an appeal in the widest
hoc dicunt se nunquam velle loqui de appellatione sense, they do not for all that say that they never want to
stricte sumpta. Porro ex obiectione predicta datur michi speak of an appeal in the strict sense. Furthermore, the
occasio explicandi modum ponendi eorum.
stated objection gives me an opportunity to explain their
position.
Discipulus: Explica.
Student: Explain it.
Magister: Duo dicunt. Primum est quod a papa heretico Master: These theorists make two statements. The first
in casu licet appellationem stricte sumptam emittere, is that one may occasionally launch an appeal in the
illam appellationem videlicet que est provocatio inique strict sense from a heretic pope, that is to say an appeal
sententie querelam continens, puta si aliquibus that challenges an unjust sentence and involves a
litigantibus coram ipso super questione fidei, pro altero complaint. This can be done, for instance, if some
eorum, accusatore vel accusato, diffinitivam contra persons litigate before the pope on a question of faith,
fidem proferret sententiam. Secundo dicunt quod si papa and the pope renders a definitive sentence against the
fiat hereticus ex causa quacunque, etiam ille qui non faith, which favours one of the litigants (either the
litigat coram ipso potest appellare contra ipsum, et ista accuser or the accused). Secondly, they say that if the
appellatio erit provocatio et non erit proprie dicta pope becomes a heretic for whatever reason, then even
appellatio.
someone who is not pursuing the case in the pope's court
may appeal against him, and this appeal will then be a
challenge rather than an appeal in the proper sense.
Discipulus: Probabilitatem videtur habere quod si papa Student: It appears probable that if the pope were to
in preiudicium litigantis coram ipso super questione render an unjust definitive judgement against the
fidei iniquam contra fidem catholicam diffinitivam catholic faith, prejudicing someone litigating before him
proferret sententiam, liceret eidem a tali iniqua sententia on a question of faith, it would be permissible for that
appellare, sed alii appellare non liceret quia sua non someone to appeal from this unjust sentence. But the
interest cum contra eum non sit prolata sententia. Item, option of an appeal would not be allowed to anyone else:
quamvis de crimine commisso extra iudicium possit the issue would be none of his business since the
aliquis accusari non est tamen contra eum appellandum. judgement is not rendered against him. Furthermore,
Quamvis ergo papa extra iudicium factus hereticus de although someone can be accused of a crime committed
heresi valeat accusari, non tamen appellandum est ab outside of the courtroom, one should nevertheless not
ipso sicut neque est appellandum a quolibet criminoso, appeal against him. Therefore although the pope who has
licet quilibet criminosus valeat accusari.
become a heretic outside of the courtroom may be
accused of heresy, one must nevertheless not appeal
from him, just as one should not appeal from any
criminal even though any criminal may be subject to an
accusation.
Magister: Ad primam istarum obiectionum respondetur Master: The answer to the first objection is that a
quod quia questio fidei est questio communis et ad question of faith is a common question, which pertains to
omnes pertinet christianos (dis. 96 c. Ubinam ubi all Christians. Pope Nicholas states in dis. 96 c. Ubinam:
300

