testes veritatis poterant merito appellari, iuxta illud teach the truth, they could deservedly be called witnesses
Redemptoris Act. 1: "eritis michi testes in Hierusalem of the Truth, according to the statement of the Redeemer
et in omni Iudea etc." Et ut legitur in eodem capitulo, in Acts 1: "ye shall be witnesses unto me both in
beatus Petrus dixit: "oportet ergo ex his viris qui Jerusalem and in all Judaea etc."[Acts 1:8] And as we
nobiscum congregati sunt in omni tempore quo intravit read in the same chapter, blessed Peter stated: "wherefore
et exivit inter nos Dominus Iesus incipiens a baptismate of these men which have companied with us all the time
Iohannis usque in diem qua adsumptus est a nobis that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning
testem resurrectionis eius nobiscum fieri unum ex from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was
istis". Predicatores ergo et doctores sunt testes veritatis. taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness
Sed testes cum in iudicio examinantur tenentur contra with us of his resurrection"[Acts 1:21-22]. Therefore
papam hereticum asserere veritatem. Ergo predicatores preachers and doctors are witnesses of the truth. But
et doctores in sermonibus et lectionibus suis contra when they are examined in court, witnesses are bound to
papam hereticum testimonium veritati perhibere state the truth against a heretic pope. Therefore preachers
tenentur.
and doctors are bound to bear witness to the truth against
a heretic pope in their sermons and lectures.
Discipulus: Ista ratio probare videtur quod tunc Student: This argument seems to prove that preachers
solummodo predicatores et doctores in suis sermonibus and doctors are only bound to assert the truth against a
et lectionibus debeant contra papam hereticum asserere heretic pope in their sermons and lectures when they are
veritatem quando ad hoc a suis superioribus ordered to do this by their superiors, in the same manner
compelluntur, quemadmodum testes tunc solummodo in which witnesses are only obligated to testify to the
contra papam hereticum perhibere testimonium veritati truth against a heretic pope when they are bound to do so
tenentur quando ad hoc per suos superiores artantur.
by their superiors.
Magister: Ista responsio vel obiectio nulla quibusdam Master: This reply or objection appears worthless to
apparet, nam non solummodo testis debet perhibere some. For a witness must not only testify to the truth
testimonium veritati quando a suo superiori when compelled by his superior, indeed he is frequently
compellitur, imo sepe ad hoc ex conscientia sine omni obligated to do so by his conscience without any
coactione per superiorem astringitur. Quia sicut coercion from a superior. Because just as the feeling of
caritatis affectio quam quilibet ad alium habere tenetur charity which everyone is bound to have towards another
suggerit unicuique ut quod uni prodest et alteri non suggests to anyone that he should never forbid something
nocet illud nequaquam prohibeat, sic eadem caritatis which is useful to one party and does no harm to another,
affectio monet unumquemque ut quod alteri prodest et so the same feeling of charity warns anyone that he do to
sibi si faciat minime nocet alteri faciat iuxta regulam another what is beneficial to that person and if performed
Salvatoris qua unusquisque iubetur alii facere quod sibi does him, the actor, no harm. In this he would be
vult fieri, que regula tunc videtur precipue locum following the rule of our Saviour by which everyone is
habere quando facere alteri quod sibi vult fieri nulli commanded to do to another what he wishes done to
nocet nec corporaliter nec spiritualiter. Sed sepe ferre himself [Matthew 7:17]. This rule is especially
testimonium veritati etiam coram non superiore suo sibi appropriate when doing to another what the actor wishes
non nocet et alteri multum prodest, quia liberat eum a done to himself harms no one either physically or
dampno vel periculo absque detrimento sui. Ergo tunc spiritually. But frequently, testifying to the truth even
quamvis testis non fuerit a superiori compulsus tenetur before someone who is not his superior does no harm to
perhibere testimonium veritati. Ergo consimiliter the actor and is most useful to another, because it frees
predicatores et doctores, quando possunt liberare the latter from condemnation or danger without
auditores suos ne incidant in perfidiam pape heretici, de detriment to the actor. Therefore in such circumstances a
necessitate salutis tenentur suis auditoribus veritatem witness is bound to testify to the truth even if a superior
contra papam hereticum indicare.
didn't coerce him. Therefore in a similar manner
preachers and doctors when they can liberate their
listeners from falling into the faithlessness of a heretic
pope, are bound by necessity of salvation to reveal the
truth to their audiences against a heretic pope.
Discipulus: Tenetne aliquis modernorum doctorum Student: Does any one of the mutually conflicting
mutuo se reprobantium quod testis aliquando non modern doctors hold that a witness must sometimes bear
compulsus a superiore tenetur perhibere testimonium witness to the truth without being compelled to this by a
veritati.
superior.
Magister: Thomas de Aquino hoc videtur asserere 2a Master: Thomas Aquinas appears to assert this in 2.2, q.
2e, q.70, art. 1, dicens: "si vero requiratur eius 70, art. 1 [Summa Theologie] where he states: "if on the
testimonium non auctoritate superioris cui obedire other hand his testimony is not required by authority of a
tenetur tunc distinguendum est. Quia si testimonium superior he is bound to obey, then we must make a
requiratur ad liberandum hominem vel ab iniusta morte distinction. Because if the testimony is needed to liberate
seu pena quacunque, vel a falsa infamia, vel etiam ab an individual either from an unjust death or from any
440

