1.1

WILLIAM OF OCKHAM, 2.1 DIALOGUS

THE
TEACHINGS
[DE DOGMATIBUS PAPAE JOHANNIS 22]
Edited by Jan Ballweg and Volker Leppin
Translated by John Kilcullen and John Scott

OF

JOHN

XXII

PROOEMIUM
"The words of his mouth are wickedness and deception", says the Psalmist [Psalm 35:4], foreseeing through a
prophetic spirit the protestation or revocation or retraction---fictitious, verbal and frivolous---of John XXII,
containing superstitious heretical wickedness and death-dealing deception. And in this same protestation,
retraction, or revocation (as in the following will appear) he tries to prove by heretical arguments manifest
heresy, and tries to whitewash wolfish malice so as to seduce the simple with ambiguous and deceptive words.
So that this may be shown more evidently, the whole protestation or revocation itself, as it has been reported by
some, we will set out in detail we will prove, adding our own criticisms.
Their report begins with the following words:
I have read: In the year of our Lord 1334 on Monday January 3, the lord held a public consistory in which he
first caused to be read the authorities and arguments of certain persons (as he has said) who hold that the purified
souls of the saints now see God clearly face-to-face. When these authorities and arguments had been read by his
clergy, as he himself instructed and wished, secondly in the same consistory he himself, verbally and with great
warmth, tried to prove that the purified souls of the saints will not see God face-to-face until after the day of
judgment. His arguments, briefly repeating them, were based on five ways or foundations.
These are the words of some reporting what they heard and narrating what they saw.
CHAPTER 1
His first argument was that
hope is not consistent with clear vision on the part of the saints. But the souls of the saints hope for the
resurrection of the body up to the day of judgment. Therefore until then they do not have clear vision of God.
The major is clear (as he says) through blessed Thomas, 1-2. The minor is clear from sacred scripture: first
because Job says, "And on the last day I will be resurrected from the earth" [Job 19:25]; second because in the
Apocalypse the souls of the holy martyrs demand, and murmuring implore, vengeance for their own blood
[Apocalypse 6:9-10].
Besides the principal heresy, this argument includes another manifest heresy, which is that all who hope for
something to come do not clearly see the divine essence. For from the fact that the souls of the saints hope for
the resurrection of the body he tries to prove that they do not have clear vision of God; this proof would be null
unless he held that all who hope for something to come do not have clear vision of God. That this is heretical is
clearly apparent. For it is certain that Christ before his passion hoped for the glory of impassibility and
immortality; if, therefore, one who hopes for something to come does not see the divine essence, it follows that
Christ before his passion and resurrection had not at all seen the divine essence.
This argument is confirmed. For the Psalmist in the person of Christ says, "In you, O Lord, I have hoped, let me
never be confounded" [Psalm 30:2], while, that is, insult will be made to me while I have the appearance of a
body of sin. Therefore Christ once hoped; and yet from the instant of his conception Christ saw the divine
essence; therefore not everyone who hopes for something to come lacks the divine vision.
This same is clear or of the angels, who hope for the coming resurrection of mankind; but they see God,
according to the text of Matthew 8 [18:10], "Their angels always see the face of my father". Therefore not all
who hope for something to come, lack the divine vision.
The aforesaid heresy having been briefly disproved, answer must be made to the sophistical argument he brings
forward to support the main error. To make this clear it must be known that although face-to-face vision of the
divine essence and the act of hoping for the same vision are inconsistent, face-to-face vision and an act of hoping
for something other than that face-to-face vision are consistent in the same person. For the soul of Christ (since
from the instant of his conception he saw the divine essence) did not hope for that vision, but hoped for the
resurrection of the body, which is to come.
Moreover, because he seems to base his position in statements of Thomas, therefore so that it may appear
evidently that he has not understood Thomas, also for the sake of those who accept the teachings of Thomas, it
must be shown that Thomas manifestly asserts the opposite in 2-2, q. 18, a. 2, where he says in the following
words: "Although Christ was a comprehensor, and consequently blessed in respect of the enjoyment of God, he
was at the same time a viator, in respect of the passibility of the nature he still bore. And therefore he was able to
hope for the glory of impassibility and immortality". And below: "Not, however, so that he had the virtue of
hope, but rather from the virtue of charity, as also one who has love of God, by the same love, loves his
neighbour". Below he says: "Since hope is a theological virtue having God for its object, the principal object of
hope is the glory of the soul, which consists in the enjoyment of God, not the glory of the body".
515

