non est censendus haereticus. Sed quicunque non est
pertinax paratus est corrigi. Ergo quicunque non est
pertinax non est censendus haereticus. Minor est
evidens de se. Maior probatur per glossam 24, q. 3, c.
Dixit apostolus quae ait, "Licet ergo teneat aliquis ea
quae sunt contra fidem dummodo paratus sit corrigi
non est habendus haereticus." Et glossa eadem causa q.
1, super c. A recta ait, "Licet quis erret si tamen paratus
est corrigi non est haereticus."

corrected should not be considered a heretic. But
whoever is not pertinacious is ready to be corrected.
Therefore whoever is not pertinacious should not be
considered a heretic. The minor [premise] is selfevident. The major [premise] is proved by the gloss on
24, q. 3, c. Dixit apostolus [col.1429] which says,
"Therefore even if someone holds things against the
faith, he should not be held to be a heretic as long as
he is ready to be corrected." And the gloss on the
same causa q. 1, c. A recta [actually c.14, Haec est
fides, col.1388] says, "Even if someone errs he is not a
heretic if he is prepared to be corrected."

Tertia ratio est haec. Qui firmiter credit omnia quae
docet universalis ecclesia esse catholica, sana et vera,
et nulli errori adhaeret pertinaciter est catholicus
reputandus. Et per consequens non est habendus
haereticus. Sed qui errat et non est pertinax credit
firmiter omnia quae docet universalis ecclesia esse
catholica, vera et sana et nulli errori adhaeret
pertinaciter. Ergo talis non est haereticus iudicandus.

A third argument is this. He who firmly believes that
everything which the universal church teaches is
catholic, sound and true and who clings pertinaciously
to no error should be regarded as catholic. And
consequently he should not be held to be a heretic.
But he who errs and is not pertinacious believes
firmly that everything which the universal church
teaches is catholic, true and sound and he does not
cling pertinaciously to any error. Therefore such a
person should not be adjudged a heretic.

Quarta ratio est haec. Non est maior ratio quod unus
errans contra fidem non pertinaciter sit haereticus
quam alius, quia de similibus simile est iudicium. Sed
multi contra fidem erraverunt qui tamen quia
nequaquam pertinaciter erraverunt non fuerunt
haeretici reputati. Ergo nec aliquis errans contra fidem,
si non est pertinax, debet inter haereticos computari.
Maior est manifesta. Minor multis probatur exemplis.
Augustinus enim in multis erravit quae postea
retractavit et per hoc se non fuisse pertinacem patenter
ostendi. Et ideo non fuit haereticus iudicatus. Idem
patet de Hieronymo et beato Cypriano de quibus
constabat quod pertinaces nullatenus extiterunt. Et
propter hoc quamvis erraverint pro haereticis habiti
non fuerunt.

A fourth argument is this. There is no better reason
why any one person not erring pertinaciously against
the faith should be a heretic than any other person,
because there is a similar judgement about similar
things. But many people have erred against the faith
who have nevertheless not been regarded as heretics
because they did not err pertinaciously. Neither should
anyone erring against the faith, therefore, be counted
among the heretics if he is not pertinacious. The major
[premise] is obvious; the minor is proved by many
examples. For Augustine erred in many ways that he
later retracted and by this clearly showed that he was
not pertinacious; and therefore he was not adjudged
heretical. The same is clear about Jerome and about
blessed Cyprian about whom it was clear that they
were by no means pertinacious; and for this reason
although they erred they were not held to be heretical.

Capitulum 9

Chapter 9

Discipulus Ad probandum quod solus errans
pertinaciter est censendus haereticus nolo ad praesens
plures rationes audire quia tecum post opus praesens
iterum omnia perscrutabor. Et ideo quomodo
respondetur ad illa quae adduxi in contrarium
manifesta.

Student For the moment I do not want to hear more
arguments to prove that only someone erring
pertinaciously should be considered a heretic because
I will investigate with you all of these things again
after this present work. And therefore make clear how
reply is made to those points that I adduced to the
contrary.

Reply to objections to including "pertinacious"
Magister Prima auctoritas quam in contrarium
allegasti est Innocentii 3 Extra, De verborum
98

Master The first text which you brought forward to
the contrary is Innocent III, Extra, De verborum

