universalem ecclesiam. Ergo ad nullum inferiorem
summo pontifice nec aliquod collegium inferius
generali concilio spectat assertorem haeresis tanquam
haereticum condemnare.

learned as to whether it is heretical pertains only to the
highest pontiff and a general council and the universal
church. Therefore it pertains to no one inferior to the
highest pontiff nor to any college inferior to a general
council to condemn as a heretic one who asserts a
heresy of this kind.

Maior istius rationis videtur certa quia qui iudicialiter
pronunciat aliquem haereticum potest pronunciare
solenniter assertionem pro qua iudicat eum esse
haereticum inter haereses computandam.

The major [premise] of this argument seems certain
because he who pronounces judicially that someone is
a heretic can solemnly pronounce that the assertion on
account of which he judges him to be a heretic should
be reckoned among the heresies.

Minorem ostendunt auctoritate et ratione. Auctoritate
primo Innocentii papae, qui, ut habetur 24, q. 1, c.
Quotiens, ait, "Quotiens fidei ratio ventilatur, arbitror
omnes fratres et coepiscopos non nisi ad Petrum, id est
sui nominis et honoris auctoritatem, referre debere." Ex
quibus verbis datur intelligi quod quaestio fidei ad
inferiorem summo pontifice referri non debet. Hinc
dicit glossa ibidem, "Aliud est quaestionem de fide
motam terminare, quod nulli praeterquam Romanae
sedi permittitur, sicut hic dicitur. Aliud est ipsam sine
diffinitione ventilare, quod patriarchae facere possunt."
Et infra, glossa obiiciens, ait, "Videtur contra Extra,
De haereticis, Ad abolendam. Nam ibi innuitur quod
illi vitandi sunt tanquam haeretici quos episcopi
vitandos duxerint ", et respondens ait, "Sed dic quod
illud intelligendum est quando tale quid dicunt quod
certum est esse haeresim, hic vero ubi dubium est."

They show the minor [premise] by an authority and by
an argument. Firstly, by the authority of Pope
Innocent who says, as we find in 24, q. 1, c. Quotiens
[col.970], "As often as an argument about faith is
ventilated, I think that all our brothers and fellow
bishops should refer to no one but Peter, that is to the
authority of his name and honour." By these words we
are given to understand that a question of faith should
not be referred to anyone less than the highest pontiff.
Hence the gloss at that place [s. v. fidei; col.1388]
says, "It is one thing to determine a question raised
about faith, which is not permitted to anyone except
the Roman see, as is said here. It is another to
ventilate it without determining it, which patriarchs
can do." And further on the gloss raises an objection
and says, "This seems to be against Extra, De
hereticis, c. Ad abolendam. For it is implied there that
those whom bishops have said should be avoided,
should be avoided as heretics." And in reply it says,
"The response is that this should be understood of
when they are talking about something that it is
certain is a heresy; but this [a case] where there is a
doubt."

Istis concordare videtur glossa dist. 80, c. 2, quae super
verbo "in fide" ait, "'In fide'", id est fideliter "infra 24,
q. 1, Quotiens ubi dicitur quod tantum ad Petrum
referenda est quaestio fidei; sed expone hic in fide, id
est fideliter. Vel possunt agitare causas fidei sed non
procedere ad sententiam, vel distingue qui sunt qui
dubitant. Nam si laici, videtur quod episcopi possunt
determinare Extra, De haereticis, Ad abolendam; si
clerici, papa Extra eodem titulo, Cum Christus." Ex his
colligitur quod nullus inferior summo pontifice potest
terminare questionem motam de fide, praecipue
quando literati dubitant et contrarie opinantur.

The gloss on dist. 80, c. 2 on the words "in fide"
seems to agree with these, saying "'in faith'", that is
faithfully. "See below, 24, q. 1, c. Quotiens where it is
said that a question of faith should be referred only to
Peter. But here expound 'in faith', that is faithfully.
[The alternatives are] either [that the bishops] are able
to carry the case on but not proceed to judgment or we
can distinguish who they are who doubt: for if they
are laymen, it seems that bishops can make a
determination (Extra, De hereticis, c. Ad abolendam),
if they are clerics, the pope (the same title, c. Cum
Christus)." We gather from these [texts] that no lesser
person than the highest pontiff can determine a
question raised about the faith, especially when
learned men are in doubt and offer opposing opinions.

Quod etiam Innocentius 3, Extra, De baptismo et eius
effectu, c. Maiores, sentire videtur. Ait enim, "Maiores
ecclesiae
causas,
praesertim
articulos
fidei
contingentes, ad Petri sedem referendas intelliget qui

Innocent III seems to think this too in Extra, De
baptismo et eius effectu, c. Maiores [col.644]. For he
says, "He who notes that Peter replied to the Lord
when he asked who the disciples said he was, "You

57

