iurisdictione ipsorum effectus, ipsi tenentur de ipso probable doubt whether a pope defamed of heresy is a
inquirere an scilicet papa de heresi diffamatus sit eorum catholic or a heretic, they have probable doubt whether
iurisdictioni subiectus. Hoc autem non possunt inquirere he has become subject to their jurisdiction. And since
nisi inquirendo an papa de heresi diffamatus sit they have probable doubt on this last point, if they
hereticus vel catholicus. Ergo in hoc casu prelati cannot arrive at the truth of the matter otherwise than by
catholici habent potestatem inquirendi de papa super an inquisition, they are bound to proceed with his case
heresi mendaciter diffamato, licet in rei veritate and to inquire, namely, whether the pope slandered of
iurisdictionem non habeant super ipsum. Sicut potest heresy is subject to their jurisdiction. But this they
quis alium citare cuius tamen in rei veritate non est cannot formally investigate unless they inquire whether
iudex.
the pope defamed of heresy is a heretic or a catholic.
Therefore in this case catholic prelates have the power to
inquire about a pope mendaciously slandered of heresy,
even if in truth they do not have jurisdiction over him.
Just as someone may summon another whose judge in
truth he is not.
Capitulum 15
Chapter 15
Discipulus: Ex predictis michi est data occasio multa Student: The aforesaid has given me the opportunity to
querendi. Ante omnia tamen expostulo ut ostendas investigate many issues. But before all else, I beseech
quibus rationibus vel auctoritatibus possit assertio you to show by what arguments and authorities the
supradicta muniri.
position just outlined may be defended.
Magister: Per rationes fundatas in scriptura divina et Master: It seems possible to prove the aforesaid claim
dictis sanctorum patrum predicta assertio videtur posse by arguments founded on holy writ and on the
probari, quam tamen primo exemplo patentissimo, ut declarations of saintly fathers. And some attempt to
nonnullis apparet, quidam demonstrare nituntur. Nam initially demonstrate it by what appears to many as a
sicut allegatum est supra, beato Marcellino papa de most obvious example. For as was argued earlier, when
heresi diffamato eo quod actum hereticalem idolatrie blessed Pope Marcellinus was defamed of heresy
videlicet commisisset, plures episcopi convenerunt et because he had committed a heretical act (namely idol
inquisitionem de ipso fecerunt. Inquisitione autem facta worship), a fair number of bishops gathered together and
quia papam non deprehenderunt hereticum ipsum performed an inquisition about him. Once the inquisition
iudicare nolebant sicut nec poterant. Ex quo datur had been completed they did not want to judge him, as
intelligi quod de papa de heresi diffamato catholici indeed they could not, since they had not found the pope
potestatem habent inquirendi et debent inquirere an to be a heretic. From which we understand that catholics
fama contineat veritatem.
have the power to inquire concerning a pope defamed of
heresy, and must inquire whether the rumour reflects the
truth.
Discipulus: Notorium fuit quod beatus Marcellinus Student: That blessed Marcellinus had committed
commiserat idolatriam et per consequens quod esset idolatry and consequently that he was a heretic was a
hereticus, et ita non est simile de beato Marcellino et de notorious fact, and there is thus no similarity between
papa mendaciter de heresi diffamato.
blessed Marcellinus and a pope mendaciously defamed
of heresy.
Magister: Istam responsionem excludunt, dicentes Master: They reject this response, saying that although
quod quamvis esset notorium apud infideles et etiam it was widely known among unbelievers and even
apud quosdam catholicos quod beatus Marcellinus among certain catholics that blessed Marcellinus had
sacrificasset idolis, tamen hoc non erat notorium apud sacrificed to idols, it wasn't at all widely known among
episcopos qui ad concilium convenerunt nec erat the bishops who had gathered in council nor widely
notorium apud quoscunque quod ipse erat hereticus, et known among anybody that he was a heretic. And so the
ideo dubitabant episcopi an esset hereticus, et forte bishops were in doubt as to whether he was a heretic;
magis credebant quod non esset hereticus, sicut nec fuit perhaps they leaned towards the belief that he was not a
hereticus. Quia tamen nesciverunt veritatem et ipse fuit heretic, as indeed he wasn't. But since they did not know
de heresi diffamatus convenerunt catholici et the truth, and he had been slandered of heresy, catholics
inquisierunt sollicite veritatem. Si enim veritatem gathered together and anxiously inquired into the truth.
scivissent superfluo inquisivissent. Inquisierunt enim de Had they indeed known the truth such inquiry would
facto pape et ita de papa infamato de heresi est have been superfluous. For they inquired about what the
inquisitio facienda.
pope had done, and thus an inquisition about a pope
slandered of heresy is mandatory.
Discipulus: Adhuc instatur contra dictum exemplum, Student: There is a further point against this specific
quia beatus Marcellinus non fuit infamatus de heresi sed example. Blessed Marcellinus was not defamed of
de idolatria tantummodo, et ita exemplum propositum heresy but only of idol worship, and thus the proferred
nequaquam concludit intentum illorum.
example does not prove their contention.
292

