sunt principia aut conclusiones iuris naturalis vel divini, in a certain sense. For they are principles or conclusions
aut sequuntur simul ex iure naturali et divino. Et ita est of natural or divine law, or follow simultaneously from
de ista assertione 'non est obediendum huiusmodi natural and divine law. This is the status of the assertion
precepto pape', quia sequitur ex his que sunt de 'one must not obey such a command of the pope',
dictamine iuris naturalis et ex aliquibus contentis in iure because it follows from premisses dictated by natural
divino. Quia per rationem naturalem scitur quod quilibet law and from certain points contained in the divine law.
debet preferre legem quam reputat divinam omni For we know by natural law that anyone must place the
mortali. Per legem autem divinam scitur quod lex law he deems divine above every human individual. And
christiana est lex divina. Ergo per rationem et legem we know by divine law that the Christian law is divine
divinam simul scitur quod lex christiana est omni law. Therefore by combining reason and divine law we
homini preferenda, et per consequens nulli precepto know that the Christian law must be placed ahead of
pape in derogationem vel subversionem legis christiane every man, and consequently that no command of the
est aliqualiter obediendum, et ita spectat quodammodo pope which detracts from or subverts the Christian law
ad ius naturale et ad ius divinum.
must in any way be obeyed, and so this proposition
pertains somehow to both natural and divine law.
Cum vero dicis quod non pertinet ad ius naturale quia But where you say that it does not pertain to natural law
tunc esset naturaliter notum, respondetur quod non est because in that case it would be naturally known, the
verum, quia multa spectant ad ius naturale tanquam answer is that this is not true, because many propositions
conclusiones que non sunt naturaliter nota. Cum autem pertain to the natural law as conclusions, which are not
dicis quod de hoc in iure divino nulla fit mentio, naturally known. And when you say that there is no
respondetur quod de hoc non fit mentio vocaliter in iure mention of this proposition in the divine law, the answer
divino, in iure tamen divino sicut conclusio virtualiter is that there is no explicit verbal mention of it in the
continetur.
divine law, and yet it is contained in the divine law
implicitly, as a conclusion.
Discipulus: Dic quomodo respondetur ad secundam Student: State how one responds to the second reason.
rationem.
Magister: Dicitur quod non est generaliter verum quod Master: The answer is that it is not generally true that
nulli clerico licet ante tempus sententie ab episcopo suo no clerk is permitted to withdraw from his bishop prior
discedere, teste glossa 2 q. 7 c. Sacerdotes, que ait: "si to sentence having been passed on the latter, witness the
prelati sunt heretici, vel excommunicati, vel non servant gloss [col. 686] to 2 q. 7 c. Sacerdotes [col. 484] which
canones, vel simoniaci, vel notorii fornicatores, tunc states: "if the prelates are heretics, or excommunicated,
potest recedi ab eis ante sententiam, (19 d. c. Nulli, 16 q. or do not observe the canons, or are simoniacs or
ult. c. Sane, 32 dis. c. Nullus". Ex quibus verbis patet notorious fornicators, then one may withdraw from them
quod licet clericis in casu ante tempus sententie late ab prior to sentence being passed, 19 dis. c. Nulli, [col.
homine ab episcopo suo vel prelato recedere, et ideo 61]16 last q. c. Sane, [col. 805] 32 dis. c. Nullus". [col.
etiam quandoque a papa ante sententiam latam ab 117] It is clear from these words that clerks are permitted
homine licet discedere.
in certain cases to withdraw from their bishop or prelate
before the passing of a human sentence on the latter, and
so it is likewise permitted sometimes to withdraw from
the pope before the passing of a human sentence on him.
Discipulus: Ista responsio non videtur apparens, quia Student: This response does not seem to be apparent,
quamvis clerico liceat quandoque ante tempus sententie because although a clerk is sometimes permitted to
late ab homine ab episcopo suo vel prelato recedere, hoc withdraw from his bishop or prelate before a human
tamen non licet ante tempus sententie late a iure. Unde sentence has been passed on the latter, he is nevertheless
si prelati sunt heretici vel excommunicati vel simoniaci not permitted to do so before the law itself has imposed a
vel notorii fornicatores, licet sententia non sit lata contra sentence. Thus, if prelates are heretics or
eos ab homine, est tamen sententia lata a iure. Sed excommunicated or simoniacs or notorious fornicators,
propter appellationem seu recusationem alicuius nulla although human sentence has not yet been passed on
est sententia lata contra papam, neque a iure neque ab them, the law itself has certainly sentenced them. But no
homine. Ergo non obstante tali appellatione vel sentence has been passed on the pope, either by law or
recusatione est pape obediendum sicut prius. Et ita si by man, as the result of someone's appeal or demurrer.
precipit ne appellationi vel recusationi huiusmodi Therefore notwithstanding such an appeal or demurrer,
deferatur, obediendum est.
the pope must be obeyed as before. And thus if he
commands that such an appeal or demurrer is not to be
honoured, he must be obeyed.
Magister: Dicitur quod secundum iura et dictamen recte Master: One responds that according to the laws and to
rationis, ante sententiam latam ab homine vel a iure non the dictate of right reason, a person is not simply allowed
licet alicui simpliciter a suo prelato recedere. to withdraw from his prelate prior to the passing of a
Verumptamen, sicut sepe per appellationem vel sentence by man or by law. Nevertheless, just as an
358

