sponte unius regimen paciuntur, tunc melius est unum
quam plures communitati preesse. Igitur propter
multiplicem varietatem personarum, locorum et
temporum non potest in huiusmodi regula certa dari.
Cum ergo Christus, ubi certa regula convenienter dari
non potest, nequaquam ecclesie regulam certam dedit,
relinquitur quod Christus minime ordinavit semper unum
caput ecclesie preficiendum cum hoc sepe possit in
perniciem ecclesie redundare.

because it can happen in a community that no one is
found suitable and adequate to undertake alone rule
of that community, not one person but several will
in such a case govern advantageously. When
someone who can suitably rule alone is found in a
community, however, and its subjects willingly
endure the rule of one person then it is better for one
person to be in charge of the community than
several. Because of the great variety of persons,
places and times, therefore, no certain rule can be
given in matters of this kind. Since Christ did not
give the church a certain rule, therefore, when a
certain rule can not conveniently be given, we are
left [to conclude] that Christ did not decree that one
head should always be set over the church since this
can often redound to the destruction of the church.

Discipulus Isti omnino nituntur potestatem summi
pontificis annullare. Sed de hoc transeamus ad presens,
et si aliter prefati assertores suam opinionem quod beatus
Petrus non accepit a Christo super alios apostolos
potestatem seu primatum fulcire nituntur, enarra.

Student: They are trying to annul completely the
power of the highest pontiff. But let us pass over
this now. If those who make this assertion try to
strengthen in some other way their opinion that
blessed Peter did not receive from Christ power or
primacy over the other apostles would you tell me.

Magister Eandem assercionem auctoritatibus sanctorum
patrum munire conantur. Et primo auctoritate beati
Anacleti, qui fuit vicinus temporibus apostolorum et ideo
gesta apostolica sibi magis nota fuerunt. Ait enim idem
Anacletus, ut recitatur dist. 21, c. In novo, "In novo
testamento post Christum Dominum a Petro cepit
sacerdotalis ordo, quia ipsi primo pontificatus in ecclesia
Christi datus est, dicente Domino ad eum, 'Tu es Petrus
et super hanc Petram edificabo ecclesiam meam, et porte
inferi non prevalebunt adversus eam; et tibi dabo claves
regni celorum.' Hic ergo ligandi solvendique potestatem
primus accepit a Domino primusque ad fidem populum
virtute sue predicacionis adduxit. Ceteri vero apostoli
cum eodem pari consorcio honorem et potestatem
acceperunt." Ex quibus verbis colligunt isti quod beatus
Petrus nullam super alios apostolos ex ordinacione
Christi habuit potestatem, tum quia asserit Anacletus eos
pares in potestate et honore fuisse, tum quia asserit
pontificatum datum beato Petro in potestate ligandi et
solvendi consistere. Omnes autem apostoli in hac
potestate pares fuerunt, ergo quantum ad pontificatum
fuerunt pares.

Master: They try to fortify that assertion with
authoritative texts from the holy fathers, and first
with a text from blessed Anacletus who was near in
time to the apostles and so was more familiar with
their deeds. For as we find in dist. 21, c. In novo,
Anacletus says [col.69], "In the New Testament the
priestly order began after Christ the Lord from Peter
because it was to him that a pontificate in the church
of Christ was first given, when the Lord said to him
[Matt. 16:18-9], 'Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And I will give to thee the keys of
the kingdom of heaven.' It was this man, therefore,
who first received the power of binding and loosing
from the Lord and first led the people to faith by the
power of his preaching. But the rest of the apostles
received honour and power with him in equal
fellowship" They gather from these words that
blessed Peter had no power over the other apostles
by Christ's decree, both because Anacletus affirms
that they were equal in power and honour and
because he affirms that the pontificate given to
blessed Peter consists in the power of binding and
loosing. All the apostles were equal in this power,
however, and so they were equal in their pontificate.

Discipulus Ista auctoritas non facit pro eis quia, ut dicit
ibidem glossa, "Omnis episcopus est par apostolico
quantum ad ordinem et racionem consecracionis, Petrus
tamen maior fuit aliis in administracione."

Student: That text does not serve their purpose
because, as the gloss on it says, "Every bishop is
equal to the pope with respect to the order and
nature of his consecration, yet Peter was greater than
the others in administration."

Magister Nonnulli predictorum assertorum dicunt hic

Master: Some of those who affirm the above say

212

