exalted by God; and yet before death, and in the time of death, Christ's soul saw the divine essence. Therefore a
person composed of body and soul can be exalted, although previously his soul saw the divine essence. The
above heretical assertion also contradicts the words of blessed Peter, as we find them in Acts 2[:32]. Speaking of
Christ after his passion, he says: "This Jesus God raised up, and we are his witnesses. Being exalted therefore by
the right hand of God and having received the promise from the Father, he has poured forth" etc. We clearly
gather from these words that Christ was exalted by God in his resurrection, and yet his soul saw the divine
essence previously. In a similar way, therefore, although the souls of the saints see the divine essence before the
day of judgment, yet when they put on their glorious bodies in resurrection the saints, composed of body and
soul, will be able to be exalted by the divine power. And so that assertion of his smacks of manifest heresy.
In addition, that assertion contradicts the holy Gospel. For glorification can be called exaltation. But Christ was
glorified after his soul saw the divine essence, as blessed John the evangelist clearly implies in chapter 7:[37-39]
of his gospel when he says, "On the last day of the festival, the great day, while Jesus was standing there he cried
out: 'Let anyone who is thirsty come to me, and let the one who believes in me drink. As the scripture says, "Out
of the believer's heart shall flow rivers of living water."' Now he said this about the Spirit, which believers in him
were to receive. For as yet the Spirit had not been given, because he had not yet been glorified." These words
suggest that after his preaching and passion, and consequently after his soul saw the divine essence, he [Jesus]
was glorified; therefore also afterwards he was exalted. From which it follows evidently that someone's soul can
first see God face-to-face, and he himself, composed of body and soul, can afterwards be exalted; and thus,
although the souls of the saints now see God face-to-face, nevertheless the saints themselves, constituted of soul
and body, can be exalted in the judgment.
The third heretical point contained in the above words is that the souls of the saints do not see God face-to-face
until the day of judgment. This has been disproved in many ways in various writings. Therefore I will disprove it
for now very briefly. By a single text of the Apostle I will show that the souls of the saints in heaven see God
face-to-face. For the apostle says, 2 Corinthians 5[:6 ff], "While we are in the body we are absent from the Lord,
for we walk by faith and not by sight." It is quite clear from these words that the Apostle proves that "while we
are in the body we are absent from the Lord" from the fact that "we walk by faith and not by sight". From this
argument of the Apostle this proposition is clearly taken: whoever walks by faith and not by sight is absent from
the Lord. But the Apostle desired before the day of judgment to be present to God, and not to be absent from the
Lord, as he himself testifies; after the above words he adds, "But we are confident and have a good will to be
absent rather from the body and to be present to God". These words clearly establish that the Apostle desired not
to be absent from the Lord, but to be present to God, before the day of judgment; for he desired this while he was
still absent in the body, long before the day of judgment. Therefore he desired not to be absent from the Lord but
to be present before God before the day of judgment. But, as the Apostle takes as a premise, whoever walks
through faith and not by sight is absent from the God; and consequently, whoever is not absent from the Lord
walks by sight and not by faith. Therefore the Apostle desired to walk by sight and not by faith before the day of
judgment---which he would not at all have desired if he had known that the souls of the saints would not see the
divine essence before the day of judgment.
The first ambiguous or multiplex and disputable point contained in the above words is that souls cannot be
exalted beyond clear vision of the divine essence. For this can have multiple meanings. One is that souls cannot
be exalted beyond the clear vision of the divine essence to any degree of clearer vision, nor to any perfection or
enjoyment or honour that they do not now have; and this meaning is erroneous, because in the judgment the
souls of the saints will be exalted beyond the clear vision they now have to a clearer vision, because they will see
the divine essence more clearly after the judgment than they see it now. For then they will be exalted to some
actual joy that they now do not have; for they will be joyful over the completion of the heavenly city and over
their union with glorious bodies; and therefore they will then be exalted to some perfection that they do not now
have. Thus also Christ's soul after the resurrection was in some way exalted, because then it received joy in the
impassibility and immortality of Christ's body; for then the soul of Christ was removed from all pain and
sadness, and thus exalted; it did not have this status before Christ's resurrection, as Christ attests [Mark 14:34],
saying "My soul is sad unto death".
Another interpretation of the above words is this: souls cannot be exalted beyond the clear vision of the divine
essence to some perfection distinct in species from the clear vision of God, greater and more perfect than clear
vision and enjoyment of God, and this sense is granted, because no perfection of the soul is greater and more
perfect than the vision and enjoyment of God. And therefore, although souls after the judgment will be exalted to
a clearer vision, not however to a vision distinct in species from the preceding vision. The joy, also, that they
will have concerning the completion of the heavenly city and the assumption of glorious bodies will not be
greater nor more perfect than the clear vision and enjoyment that they now have. And thus this sense does not in
any way prove the point intended by this protestor or revoker; but the first sense, if it were true, would evidently
imply his point. And therefore he takes the above assertion in its first sense, and for this reason errs openly.
But someone may say that he does not take the above words in the first sense, because then he would have to
concede that someone seeing the divine essence could receive or desire nothing else---which he does not say,
518

