exemplari, ipsis Christo dicente Matthei 5 c., "Vos estis
lux mundi", et sequitur, "Sic luceat lux vestra coram
hominibus, ut videant opera vestra bona et glorificent
patrem vestrum qui in celis est." De modo pascendi
correccione et disciplina habetur Iohannis 20 c. ubi dixit
Christus omnibus apostolis, "Quorum remiseritis peccata
remittuntur eis, et quorum retinueritis retenta sunt", ubi
videtur Christum omnibus apostolis potestatem
corripiendi alios commisisse.

therefore, teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you." They were
also all bound to feed [Christ's sheep] by exemplary
living since Christ said to them in Matthew
5[:14,16], "You are the light of the world. ... So let
your light shine before men, that they may see your
good works and glorify your Father who is in
heaven." We read in John 20[:23] about the way of
feeding by correction and discipline when Christ
said to all the apostles, "Whose sins you shall
forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins you
shall retain they are retained." Here Christ is seen to
have committed to all the apostles the power of
correcting others.

Discipulus Ista racio non concludit quia beato Petro
collata fuit potestas corripiendi cunctos Christianos non
solum in foro consciencie sed eciam in foro ecclesie;
aliis autem apostolis cum Christus dixit eis, "Quorum
remiseritis", etc., potestas corripiendi in foro consciencie
tantum fuit commissa.

Student: That argument is not conclusive because
the power to correct all christians was granted to
blessed Peter not only in the forum of conscience
but also in the forum of the church; however, when
Christ said to the other apostles, "Whose sins you
shall forgive", etc, he committed to them only the
power to correct in the forum of conscience.

Magister Hanc responsionem isti improbare nituntur hoc
modo. Ubi Christus ordinavit modum corrigendi in foro
ecclesie nichil speciale beato Petro commisit, sed
potestatem corrigendi in foro ecclesie commisit
solummodo communitati ecclesie, dicens Matthei 18, "Si
peccaverit in te frater tuus, vade et corripe eum inter te et
ipsum solum. Si te audierit, lucratus eris fratrem tuum; si
autem te non audierit, adhibe tecum unum vel duos, ut in
ore duorum vel trium testium stet omne verbum. Quod si
non audierit eos, dic ecclesie; si autem ecclesiam non
audierit, sit tibi sicut ethnicus et publicanus." Ex quibus
verbis datur intelligi quod Christus dedit ecclesie
potestatem corripiendi in foro ecclesie et non alicui
apostolo in speciali.

Master: They try to attack that reply in this way.
When Christ regulated the way of correcting in the
forum of the church he did not commit anything
special to blessed Peter; rather he committed the
power of correcting in the forum of the church to the
community of the church only, saying at Matthew
18[:15-8], 'But if thy brother shall offend against
thee, go and rebuke him between thee and him
alone. If he shalt hear thee, thou shalt gain thy
brother. And if he will not hear thee, take with thee
one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word might stand. And if he will not
hear them, tell the church. And if he will not hear
the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and the
publican." We are given to understand by these
words that it was to the church that Christ gave the
power of correcting in the forum of the church not to
any apostle in particular.

Discipulus In istis verbis agitur de correccione fraterna
et non de correccione iudiciali in foro ecclesie.

Student: Those words speak about fraternal
correction, not about judicial correction in the forum
of the church.

Magister Respondent isti quod in principio auctoritatis
ait Christus de correccione fraterna que debet precedere
saltem sepe correccionem iudicialem; in fine autem
loquitur de correccione iudiciali in foro ecclesie cum
dicit, "Quod si non audierit eos, dic ecclesie; si autem
ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus et
publicanus."

Master: They reply that in the beginning of that text
Christ is speaking about the fraternal correction that,
often at least, should precede judicial correction; he
speaks about judicial correction in the forum of the
church, however, at the end when he says, "And if
he will not hear them, tell the church. And if he will
not hear the church, let him be to thee as the heathen
and the publican."

210

