inferende iniurie propulsantur. Sed iniurias propulsare injuries committed or yet to be inflicted are warded off.
ad viros perfectos minime pertinet, tum quia talibus Ipsa But the repulsing of such wrongs is not the business of
Veritas ait Matth. 5: "Ego autem dico vobis non perfect individuals. For Truth itself states in Matthew 5:
resistere malo". Tum quia armis iniuria propulsatur, "But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil". [Matthew
viris autem perfectis, sicut clericis, non licet arma 5:39] And weapons ward off wrongs, but perfect
movere. Ergo saltem ad viros perfectos minime spectat individuals, such as clerks, are not allowed to wield
impugnantes papam hereticum defensare. Ista sunt que arms. Therefore it does not pertain to perfect individuals
rationem factam de operibus misericordie et nonnullas (at least) to defend opponents of a heretic pope. These
alias, ut michi videtur, impediunt. Ideo quomodo objections, it seems to me, restrict the validity of the
respondetur ad ea gestio scire.
point you have made, as well as that of some other
arguments. Therefore I would like to know how one
replies to them.
Capitulum 39
Chapter 39
Magister: Dicunt nonnulli quod iste obiectiones tuam Master: Some say that these objections demonstrate
insipientiam manifestant, et quod non intelligis your lack of wisdom, and indicate that you do not
assertionem predictam ostendunt. Ad cuius evidentiam understand the assertion being discussed. They say that
tria dicunt esse notanda, quorum primum est quod sicut three points must be noted in order to clarify matters.
diversa sunt opera iustitie quorum quedam omnibus Here is the first of these points. In the same way that
subditis et prepositis possunt congrue convenire (sive there are differing works of justice, some of which may
enim subditus sive prepositus alienum habet, de appropriately concern both subjects and rulers (for
necessitate iustitie restituere debet nisi ex aliqua causa whether you are a subject or a ruler you must return by
rationabili excusetur), quedam vero sunt opera iustitie necessity of justice property which is not yours unless
que non conveniunt omnibus sed solum prepositis (sicut you are excused from this by some reasonable cause),
iudicare iuste non competit nisi superiori), sic sunt while other works of justice do not concern everyone but
quedam opera misericordie et beneficentie que omnibus only rulers (for instance to judge with justice only
competere possunt, sicut orare, intercedere pro aliquo, et pertains to a superior), so are there some works of
nonnulla alia, quedam vero sunt opera misericordie que compassion and kindness which may concern everyone
non omnibus competere debent, cuiusmodi opus est (for instance to pray, or to intercede on someone's
nonnunquam aliquos armis defendere.
behalf, and a few other such) while there are certain
works of compassion, on the other hand, which must not
concern everyone, such as the task which sometimes
arises of defending certain individuals by force of arms.
Secundo dicunt esse notandum quod licet precepta It must secondly be noted, they say, that although
affirmativa obligent semper, non tamen pro semper, et affirmative commands are always obligatory, they are
ideo semper remanet quilibet obligatus ad opera nevertheless not binding under every circumstance
misericordie que sibi competunt proximis exhibenda. which might arise. And thus everyone remains obligated
Non tamen tenetur quilibet talia opera misericordie to perform personally appropriate works of mercy to his
omni tempore exercere sed loco et tempore opportunis, neighbours. Nevertheless everyone is not bound to
aliis circumstantiis debitis observatis.
exercise such works of compassion at all times, but only
when the time and the place are opportune, and when
other relevant circumstances are taken into account.
Tertio dicunt esse notandum quod multis modis potest They say that it must thirdly be noted that a person may
quis alios defensare. Uno modo armis violentie defend others in many ways. One way is by resisting
resistendo, alio modo verbis pro aliquo allegando vel with force of arms; another is by verbally arguing on
impugnare volentes verbis exhortatoriis, preceptoriis, someone's behalf or by dissuading would-be attackers
vel prohibitoriis seu aliis quibuscunque a violentia from violence by words of encouragement, command,
reprimendo, alio modo occultando vel non prodendo, prohibition or by other words of whatever nature;
aut in domum vel locum tutum recipiendo, aliisque another is by hiding someone or by not betraying him to
modis quam pluribus quos longum esset enarrare the authorities, or by giving him shelter in one's home or
contingit alios defensare.
in some safe place. And there exist many other ways to
defend others, which it would take a long time to
recount.
Discipulus: Narra quomodo ad obiectiones meas per Student: Describe how one responds to my objections
ista notabilia respondetur.
with the help of the points just listed.
Magister: Ad primam dicunt quod quamvis interdum Master: They say to the first objection that although
oporteat etiam malis opera misericordie exhibere, non occasionally it might be proper to exhibit works of
tamen omnia opera misericordie sunt omnibus malis et compassion even to bad people, nevertheless all works
impiis exhibenda. Intercedere enim apud iudicem pro of mercy must not be performed on behalf of all bad and
puniendis reis est opus misericordie et tamen pro irreligious persons. For instance, it is a work of mercy to
332

