nec ecclesia universalis nec aliqua alia congregatio aut While others say that neither the universal church nor
persona habet potestatem requirendi vel cohercendi any other congregation or person has the power of
papam nisi in duobus casibus. Primus est si papa fuerit summoning or coercing the pope except in two cases.
de heresi graviter infamatus licet falso, secundus est si The first is if the pope were seriously if falsely slandered
in aliquo crimine de quo scandalizetur ecclesia sit of heresy, the second is if he were notoriously involved
notorie deprehensus et ipse incorrigibilem se ostendat. in some crime which would scandalize the church and
showed himself to be incorrigible.
Discipulus: Prosequere primo primam opinionem quia Student: Proceed initially with the first opinion, for
quamvis putem eam hereticam, qualiter tamen although I believe it to be heretical I would nevertheless
assertores ipsius eam fundare conantur, et quomodo ad like to know (for the sake of argument and so as to
rationes et auctoritates in contrarium respondere understand the truth more acutely) how its proponents
nitantur gratia exercitii ut acutius veritatem intelligam attempt to underpin it and how they try to respond to the
scire desidero.
arguments and authorities which oppose it.
Magister: Pro predicta assertione potest primo sic Master: One may first argue for the aforestated opinion
argui. Ille qui nullam habet iurisdictionem coactivam in this way. He who possesses no coercive jurisdiction is
imperatori aut regi vel alii principi aut populo est subject to the emperor, to the king, or to another prince
subiectus, quia qui nulli alteri est prepositus alicui est or people, because whoever does not rule over another is
subditus, aliter enim nullum ordinem ad alios homines subject to someone. For otherwise he would have no
nec superioritatis nec inferioritatis haberet. Vbi autem order of status (either of superiority or inferiority) with
non est ordo ibi est confusio; confusio autem inter respect to other men. But where there is no order of
homines inveniri non debet. Qui ergo quantum ad status confusion reigns; and confusion must not exist
iurisdictionem coactivam nulli est prepositus quantum among men. Therefore he who is the coercive ruler of no
ad iurisdictionem coactivam alicui est subiectus. Sed one is subject to someone as to coercive jurisdiction. But
papa ex ordinatione Christi super alios nullam habet the pope by Christ's dispensation has no coercice
iurisdictionem coactivam. Igitur quantum ad jurisdiction over others, therefore in this matter he is
iurisdictionem coactivam alicui est subiectus et nonnisi subject to someone, and only to emperor, king, or prince.
imperatori aut regi vel principi. Igitur alicui predictorum Therefore the pope is subject to one of these, and hence
est papa subiectus et ita aliquis predictorum est iudex one of them is the normal judge of the pope.
ordinarius pape.
Capitulum 3
Chapter 3
Discipulus: Quamvis asserere quod papa super alios Student: Although it must be considered heretical, I
non habet iurisdictionem coactivam sit hereticum believe, to assert that the pope does not have coercive
reputandum, ut arbitror, dic tamen quomodo predicti jurisdiction over others, state nevertheless how the
assertores hoc probare nituntur.
aforementioned theorists attempt to prove this.
Magister: Hoc auctoritatibus scripture divine et Master: They try to point this out by the authorities of
sanctorum moliuntur ostendere. Primo autem auctoritate holy writ and of saints. And indeed to begin with by the
Christi dicentis apostolis Matth. 20: "scitis quia authority of Christ saying to the apostles in Matthew
principes gentium dominantur eorum et qui maiores 20(:25-27): "Ye know that the princes of the gentiles
sunt potestatem exercent in eos, non ita erit inter vos, exercise dominion over them, and they that are great
sed quicumque voluerit inter vos maior fieri sit vester exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so
minister et qui voluerit inter vos primus esse erit vester among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let
servus". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod maioritas him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief
et primitas illius qui est maior et primus inter omnes among you let him be your servant". [Marsilius of
discipulos Christi cuiusmodi sunt omnes christiani in Padua, Defensor Pacis, II.iv.13] From these words we
ministrando et serviendo consistit et per consequens understand that the greatness and primacy of him who is
iurisdictionem coactivam super alios nullatenus habet. great and first among all the disciples of Christ (all
Christians are such disciples) consists in ministry and
service, and that consequently he in no way possesses
coercive jurisdiction over others.
Discipulus: Ministerium et servitium pape consistit in Student: The ministry and service of the pope consists
regendo et gubernando gregem sibi commissum, quod in ruling and governing the flock entrusted to him,
nequaquam facere posset nisi iurisdictionem coactivam which he could by no means do unless he possessed
haberet, nec obviat quod papa debet esse minister et coercive jurisdiction. Nor is the pope's duty to be
servus nam etiam iudex temporalis puniendo minister and servant an obstacle, for even a temporal
malefactores minister est iuxta sententiam Apostoli ad judge when punishing wrongdoers is a "minister"
Rom. 13.
according to the pronouncement of the Apostle in
Romans 13[:4].
Magister: Hanc responsionem dicunt Christum Master: They say that Christ excludes this explanation
excludere, cum sic ministerium et servitium imponit since he assigns ministry and service to the greater and
270

