etiam de laico verberato iniuste, quia ex caritate fraterna not only with respect to a battered clerk but also in the
quilibet, cum convenienter potest, tenetur alii in omni case of an unjustly battered layman, for everyone who
periculo subvenire, et hec responsio ex glossa super conveniently can is bound by brotherly love to assist
preallegato capitulo Quante colligitur, que ait: "videtur someone else in any danger. This response one gathers
peccare omnis qui non defendit alium si potest (23 q. 3 from the gloss to the c. Quante argued earlier [1 Dial.
Non inferenda et c. ultimo), et si non possit aliter 6.41] which states: "it seems that everyone sins who
defendere, saltem defendat clamore", et infra: "si ego does not defend another when he can (23 q. 3 Non
qui non habeo aliquam potestatem, video, quod aliquis inferenda [col. 898] and last chapter of the question), [c.
vult verberare clericum, sive percutere, sine meo Ostendit col. 898] and if he cannot defend otherwise let
consilio, vel auxilio, non credo quod sim him at least defend by shouting". And further on: "if I,
excommunicatus si non prohibeo illum, licet alias forte who have no official power at all, see that someone
peccem quia ipsum non defendo cum possim". Ex wants to batter or to strike a clerk without my counsel or
quibus verbis colligitur primo quod sunt diversi modi assistance, I do not believe that I would be
defendendi, cum aperte dicatur quod potest quis excommunicated if I do not stop him, although from
defendere clamore, et eadem ratione contingit defendere another perspective I might perhaps commit a sin
verbis monitoriis monendo inferentem iniuriam quod because I do not defend the clerk when I can". [col.
desistat, quod etiam glossa ibidem asserit manifeste, 1919] From these words one gathers, to begin with, that
dicens: "alia est prohibitio sociorum et aliorum, quia illi there exist different methods of providing defense, since
solummodo admonendi sunt verbis sed non factis it is clearly stated that someone may provide a defense
vindicando" videlicet iniuriam illatam, licet factis si by shouting; and by the same token one could provide
possint teneantur defendere saltem expositum periculo defense by admonitory words, warning the harm doer to
occultando. Sicut enim secundum Augustinum, ut desist. Actually the gloss obviously asserts this in the
habetur 23 q, 4 c. Ipsa pietas, quilibet tenetur alium se context just cited, stating: "different is the prohibition
volentem occidere liberare et de periculo si potest etiam provided by partners and others, because these may only
violenter extrahere, ita tenetur quilibet alium quesitum warn by words but not punish by overt actions", punish
occidi de periculo liberare, si potest, saltem, si non that is to say for the harm done, although they are
potest aliter, occultando. Sunt ergo diversi modi obligated to offer an active defense (if they can) at least
defendendi alium in periculo constitutum.
to the extent of hiding the person exposed to danger. For
just as (according to Augustine, and this is recorded in
23 q. 4 c. Ipsa pietas) [col. 909] everyone is obligated to
extricate another who wants to commit suicide [in a
collapsing building], and if possible to remove him from
danger even by the use of force, so likewise is everyone
who can bound to liberate from danger someone who is
the deliberate target of an assassin, at the very least by
hiding him if no other possibility exists. Therefore there
are different methods of defending someone who is in
danger.
Secundo ex verbis glosse colligitur quod videns Secondly, one gathers from the words of the gloss that
clericum verberari et non defendens si potest, peccet, someone who sees a clerk being battered and does not
tamen excommunicationis sententiam non incurrit. Et defend him if he can, commits a sin but doers not incur a
per hoc respondetur ad rationem glosse superius sentence of excommunication. And by this point one
allegatam, quia per illam rationem non concluditur quod responds to the reason of the gloss argued earlier, [1
non defendens clericum, si potest, non peccat, sed quod Dial. 6.42] because that reason does not lead to the
non incidit in excommunicationis sententiam.
conclusion that someone who does not defend a clerk (if
he can) does not commit a sin, but that he does not incur
a sentence of excommunication.
Discipulus: Videtur quod ista ratio non concludit quod Student: It seems that this reason does not conclude that
non incidit in excommunicationis sententiam, nam iudex he does not incur a sentence of excommunication. For a
vel iurisdictionem habens non defendendo clericum, judge or someone who possesses jurisdiction incurs a
cum potest, incidit in excommunicationis sententiam, et sentence of excommunication when he has the
tamen nullo predictorum modorum participat clericum possibility of defending a clerk and does not, and yet he
verberanti, quia nec locutione, nec oratione, nec in does not collaborate with him who is battering the clerk
crimine, nec eius mandato clericus verberatur, nec in any of the aforementioned ways: indeed, not in speech
auctoritatem prestat, quia plus est auctoritatem prestare or in utterance, nor in the actual crime, nor is the clerk
quam non defendere.
battered by his order, nor does he sanction the deed by
his authority, for it is more significant to provide
authority than to refrain from providing defense.
Magister: Potest dici quod glossa innuit quod iudex et Master: It is possible to say that the gloss implies that a
345

