putent quod liceat papae alios errores quam haereses
damnare.

other errors. For I want to know whether the learned
think that it is permissible for the pope to condemn
other errors apart from heresies.

The condemnation of errors that are not heresies
Magister Errores alii sunt in triplici differentia.
Quidam enim nec contrariantur his quae pertinent ad
fidem et bonos mores nec eos tenere aliquod animae
affert periculum. Tales sunt errores in puris
philosophicis et etiam errores aliqui circa aliqua dicta
divina de quibus inveniri non potest quid indubie sit
tenendum. De talibus loquitur Augustinus in
Encheridion dicens, "In rebus in quibus nihil interest ad
capescendum Dei regnum errare nullum aut minimum
est peccatum." De huiusmodi etiam intelligit Anselmus
in lib. 1 Cur Deus homo c. 18 dicens, "In his rebus de
quibus diversa sentiri possunt sine periculo, sicuti est
istud unde nunc agimus. Si enim nescimus utrum
plures homines eligendi sunt quam sunt angeli perditi,
an non alterum horum existimamus plusquam alterum,
nullum puto esse animae periculum Si, inquam, in
huiusmodi rebus sic exposuimus divina dicta ut
diversis sententiis favere videantur, nec alicubi
invenitur ut quid indubitanter tenendum sit
determinetur non arbitror reprehendi debere." Tales
errores secundum multos non licet papae damnare quia
damnando animas laquearet obligando fideles ad
credendum aliqua forte contra conscientiam vel
negandum quod tenere vel negare nullum parit
periculum.

Master There are three kinds of other errors. For
some neither are opposed to those things that pertain
to faith and good morals nor is it reported of them that
they hold anything of danger to the soul. Errors of this
kind are those which concern purely philosophical
matters and also some errors about divine sayings
about which it can not be discovered what should be
held without doubt. Augustine speaks about such
matters in his Enchiridion, saying, "It is no sin or the
slightest sin to err in those matters which do not at all
pertain to the taking hold of God's kingdom." Anselm
also means things of this kind when he says in chapter
18 of book 1 of Cur deus homo, "... in those matters
about which different things can without danger be
thought, like the matter we are now considering. For if
we do not know whether more men are to be chosen
than there are lost angels, I do not think there is any
danger to the soul whether or not we think the one of
these more than the other. If, I say, we have
expounded divine sayings in matters of this kind in
such a way that they seem to favour various opinions,
and it is nowhere found that it is determined what
should be held indubitably, I do not think that this
should be censured." According to many people it is
not permissible for the pope to condemn such errors
because in condemning them he would entangle souls
by obliging believers to believe things that are perhaps
against their conscience or to deny what it produces
no danger to hold or to deny.

Alii sunt errores repugnantes his quae in gestis
fidelium, cronicis, vel historiis fide dignis habentur. Et
de istis dicunt nonnulli quod ipsos potest papa damnare
non tanquam hereticos sed tanquam periculosos et
ecclesiae perniciosos. Damna enim permaxima et
pericula tam corporalia quam spiritualia possent fideles
incurrere si quaecunque contenta in gestis, historiis, et
cronicis cuilibet negare liceret. Cum ergo papa damnis
et periculis fidelium debeat obviare, potest tales errores
damnare et errantes debitae subdere ultioni.

There are other errors which are opposed to what is
found in accounts of the deeds of believers, in
chronicles, or in histories worthy of trust. Some
people say about these that the pope can condemn
them not as heretical but as dangerous and pernicious
to the church. For believers could incur the greatest
damage and dangers both corporal and spiritual if
anyone at all were permitted to deny whatever is
contained in accounts of deeds, histories and
chronicles. Since a pope is obliged to prevent damage
and dangers to believers, therefore, he can condemn
such errors and subject those erring to the appropriate
punishment.

Alii sunt errores, de quibus est dictum prius, ex quibus
et aliis veris quae negari non possunt contingit aliquam
haereticam pravitatem inferre, qui proprie dicuntur
sapere haeresim manifestam et large possunt haereses
appellari. Et tales errores non tanquam haereticos
stricte loquendo sed tanquam sapientes haeresim
manifestam licet papae damnare. Unde si quis diceret

There are other errors of which we spoke above, from
which and [i.e.together with] other truths which can
not be denied it is possible to infer some heretical
wickedness. These are properly said to smack of
manifest heresy and can be broadly called heresies.
And it is licit for the pope to condemn such errors, not
as heretical strictly speaking, but as smacking of

81

