papa et in multis aliis. Fides autem in solo papa posset no means disappear, since it would remain in the pope
salvari quemadmodum tempore passionis Christi in and in many others. Indeed the faith may be saved in the
unica muliere remansit. Tum quia unus potest ad se pope alone, just as it remained in a single woman at the
trahere totum concilium generale, et unus potest toti time of Christ's passion. Further: a single person may
residuo concilii generalis contradicere, sicut notatur di. attract to his position the whole of the general council,
31 c. Nicena. Ergo multo fortius papa qui est principalis and a single person may contradict the entire remainder
et caput concilii generalis potest toti residuo of the general council, which is noted in di. 31 c.
contradicere et per consequens residuo minime est Nicena[col. 114]. Therefore all the more potently can the
subiectus. Quinto sic. Illa congregatio que nullam pope (who is the head and mainstay of the general
auctoritatem habet nisi a papa, et que absque papa council) contradict the entire remainder thereof, and
congregari non potest, nullam habet iurisdictionem consequently he is not subject to this remainder. The
super papam nisi papa sponte eius iudicio se submittat. fifth argument is this. That congregation which has no
Sed concilium generale nullam habet iurisdictionem seu authority except from the pope, and which cannot come
potestatem aut auctoritatem nisi a papa, nec potest together to meet without the pope, has no jurisdiction
absque eius mandato aliqualiter celebrari. Igitur papa over the pope unless the latter spontaneously submits
nisi voluntarie se submittat iudicio concilii generalis himself to its judgment. But the general council has no
minime est subiectus.
jurisdiction or power or authority save from the pope,
nor can it in any way be celebrated without his
permission. Therefore the Pope is not subjected to the
judgment of the general council unless he freely submits
to it.
Capitulum 13
Chapter 13
Discipulus: Quomodo allegatur in contrarium Student: Indicate how one might argue for the contrary
manifesta.
position.
Magister: Quod papa iudicio generalis concilii sit Master: There are some who strive to demonstrate that
subiectus quidam moliuntur ostendere. Primo sic. the pope is subject to the judgment of the general
Ecclesia universalis iurisdictionem obtinet super papam council. First in this way. The universal church holds
de heresi diffamatum. Igitur et ista congregatio que jurisdiction over a pope slandered of heresy. Therefore
vicem gerit universalis ecclesie iurisdictionem habet that congregation which represents the universal church
super papam de heresi diffamatum. Concilium autem also has jurisdiction over a pope defamed of heresy. But
generale gerit vicem universalis ecclesie, ergo etc. the general council represents the general church,
Secundo hoc probatur sic. Diffamatus de aliquo crimine therefore etc. Secondly this is proved as follows. A
est iudicio concilii generalis subiectus si eidem concilio person slandered of some crime is subject to the
super obiecto crimine respondere tenetur. Papa autem judgment of the general council if he is bound to answer
diffamatus de heresi generali concilio respondere to this same council in the matter of the crime he stands
tenetur. Vnde et in decretis 2 q. 7 para. Item cum accused of. But a pope defamed of heresy is obligated to
Balaam sic legitur: "Symachus papa in Romana synodo answer to the general council. Hence we read the
dignitate sua expoliatus, prius statui pristino reddi following in the Decretum at 2 q. 7 para. Item cum
decernitur, ut tunc veniret ad causam, et si ita recte Balaam[col. 497-498]: "Pope Symachus was stripped of
videretur accusantium propositionibus responderet. his dignity in a Roman synod. It was initially resolved
Digna res visa est maximo numero sacerdotum atque that he be reinstated in his original position, and then
mereretur effectum. Et cum postmodum ordinaretur deal with his case, and should this be deemed acceptable
quomodo esset accusandus, prefatus papa, ut causam he would respond to the points of his accusers. This was
diceret, occurrebat, sed ab emulis est impeditus". Ex seen as a worthy procedure to a majority of priests and
quibus verbis datur intelligi quod Symachus papa qui was carried out. And when it was subsequently being
fuit de heresi accusatus sicut notatur in glossa di. 17 decided how he was to be accused, this pope presented
para. Hinc, coram synodo respondere debebat. Ergo in himself to state his case, but was impeded by enemies".
causa heresis concilium generale est super papam de From these words we understand that Symachus who
heresi diffamatum.
was accused of heresy (as noted in the gloss to di. 17
para. Hinc)[s.v.immunis col.72] was obligated to answer
before the synod. Therefore in a case of heresy the
general council is above a pope defamed of heresy.
Tertio, sic per glossas super decretis hoc probatur. Ait Thirdly, this is proved as follows by glosses on the
enim glossa di. 19 c. Anastasius: "papa tenetur requirere canons. For the gloss on di. 19 c. Anastasius
consilium episcoporum quod verum est ubi de fide [s.v.concilio col.87] states: "the pope is obligated to
agitur et tunc synodus maior est papa". Hiis verbis request the advice of the bishops, which is true where
patenter asseritur quod in causa fidei synodus maior est the issue is one of faith, and in that case the synod is
papa . Item glossa di. 15 c. Sicut dicit in hec verba: greater than the pope". By these words it is openly
"videtur ergo quod papa non possit destruere statuta asserted that in a case of faith the synod is greater than
289

