confert habenti neque necessario auget in eo graciam et
virtutes, tum quia summus pontifex, quantum ad
regimen et potestatem ecclesiasticam, plenitudinem
obtinet potestatis, et tamen papa potest heretica
pravitate fedari. Ergo et tota multitudo clericorum non
obstante tali regimine pravitate poterit heretica
maculari.

rule does not necessarily confer on the one
possessing it, nor increase in him, grace and the
virtues and because, with respect to ecclesiastical rule
and power, the highest pontiff possesses plenitude of
power, and yet the pope can be disgraced by heretical
wickedness. Therefore the whole multitude of the
clergy too can be defiled by heretical wickedness
notwithstanding the rule they have.

Secundum eciam non obstat, quia multi inveniuntur
laici clericis sancciores et in fide stabiliores, teste beato
Ambrosio, qui, ut habetur 8, q. 1, c. Quid autem ait,
"Quid autem ego vos arguo cum possitis me uno
sermone convincere? Convincor enim cum in hac parte
clericos vobis magis video negligentes. Quomodo enim
possum corrigere filios cum fratres emendare non
possim? aut qua fiducia succenseam laicis cum a
consortibus pudoris verecundia conticescam." Ex
quibus verbis datur intelligi quod laici possunt esse
clericis sancciores. Ergo propter maiorem sanctitatem
non debet dici quod tota multitudo clericorum non
potest contra fidem errare.

The second [reason] [2] too does not prevent them
[from erring] because many of the laity are found
who are holier and more unwavering in faith than the
clergy. As we find in 8, q. 1, c. Quid autem, blessed
Ambrose attests to this when he says [col.597],
"However, why do I censure you when you can
convict me with one word. For I am convicted when
in this part I see the clergy neglecting things more
than you. For how can I correct children when I can
not improve my brothers or with what confidence
may I be angry with the laity when I am silent at the
shame of my brethren?" We are given to understand
by these words that the laity can be more holy than
the clergy. Therefore it ought not to be said that the
whole multitude of the clergy could not err against
faith on account of greater holiness.

Nec propter maiorem sapienciam seu literaturam qua
clerici pollent debet dici quod tota multitudo clericorum
errare non potest, quia, sicut sapiencia et literatura est
sepe occasio stabilicionis in fide, ita est frequenter
occasio heretice pravitatis. Unde et communiter
heresum inventores sunt viri literati Scripturarum
noticiam Divinarum habentes, suos errores ex ipsis
sacris literis assumentes ipsosque errores per Sacras
Scripturas fulcire conantes, secundum quod testatur
beatus Clemens et legitur dist. 28, c. Relatum. Et beatus
Hieronimus insinuat in prologo Biblie, asserens
nonnullos ad voluntatem suam Sacram Scripturam
trahere repugnantem. Propter maiorem ergo noticiam
Scripturarum non est dicendum quod tota multitudo
clericorum non potest errare contra fidem .

Nor should it be said [3] that the whole multitude of
the clergy can not err because of the greater wisdom
or learning in which the clergy are powerful, because
just as wisdom and learning are often the occasion of
stability in faith, so they are frequently the occasion
of heretical wickedness. Hence it is that the authors
of heresies are commonly learned men with
knowledge of the divine scriptures, taking their errors
from those sacred scriptures and trying to support
those errors through the sacred scriptures, according
to what blessed Clement attests as read in dist. 28
[actually, dist. 37; col.139], c. Relatum. Blessed
Jerome also implies it in his prologue to the bible
where he asserts that some people twist sacred
scripture, despite its opposition, according to their
own will. It should not be said, therefore, that on
account of greater knowledge of the scriptures the
whole multitude of the clergy can not err against
faith.

Nec est dicendum quod non potest contra fidem errare
quia tota multitudine clericorum errante periclitaretur
fides, quia, sicut testatur beatus Paulus 1 ad Corinthios
2 c., "Fides nostra non est in sapiencia hominum sed est
in virtute Dei." Sed virtute Dei ita potest fides catholica
sustentari in laicis sicut in literatis et clericis, presertim
cum sepe simplices laici et pauperes stabiliores in fide
inveniantur quam clerici, maxime cum Christus fidem
per idiotas et illiteratos fundaverit. Ergo quamvis omnes
clerici deviarent a fide non periclitaretur fides.

Nor should it be said that it can not err against faith
because [4] faith would be endangered if the whole
multitude of the clergy were to err because, as
blessed Paul witnesses in 1 Corinthians 2[:5], "Our
faith does not stand on human wisdom but on the
power of God." But by God's power catholic faith
can be preserved among the laity just as it can among
the learned and the clergy, especially since simple
and poor laypeople are often found to be more stable
in faith than the clergy and particularly because
Christ founded the faith through the ignorant and the

250

