sed sacerdos cathedram, non locus sanctificat hominem
sed homo locum." Et idem prout recitatur eadem dist.
c. ult. ait, "Non qui maior fuerit in honore ille est
iustior, sed qui fuerit iustior ille est maior." Ex hiis
patet aperte quod in suscepcione ecclesiastice dignitatis
neque gracia et virtutes necessario conferuntur neque
ipsas necesse est augeri. Quod eciam per Scripturam
Divinam probari videtur quia, ut habetur 2 Mach. 5. c.,
"Non propter locum gentem sed propter gentem locum
Dominus elegit." Ex quo concluditur quod non propter
dignitatem prelatum sed propter merita prelatorum
Dominus approbat dignitatem, et ideo in suscepcione
dignitatis non est necesse graciam et virtutes infundi
vel augeri.

saints are not those who hold those places [founded
by] the saints but those who do works like theirs."
And as we read in c. Multi of the same distinction
John Chrysostom says [col.147], "It is not the see that
makes the priest but the priest the see, not the place
that sanctifies the man but the man that sanctifies the
place." As the last chapter of the same distinction
records, the same man also says [col.147], "It is not he
who is greater in honour who is more just, but it is the
one who is more just who is greater." It is quite clear
from these [texts] that grace and virtues neither are
necessarily conferred on the obtaining of an
ecclesiastical dignity nor are they necessarily
increased. This also seems provable through divine
Scripture because, as we find in 2 Mach. 5[:19], "The
Lord did not choose the people for the place's sake,
but the place for the people's sake." We conclude from
this that the Lord does not approve of a prelate on
account of his dignity but approves of a dignity on
account of the merits of its prelates. And so it is not
necessary for grace and virtues to be infused or
increased on the obtaining of a dignity.

Discipulus Ex ista racione sequi videtur quod in
suscepcione ordinum gracia non confertur nec augetur.

Student: It seems to follow from that argument that
grace is neither conferred nor increased on the
obtaining of orders.

Magister Ex ista racione non sequitur quod in
collacione ordinum gracia non conferatur nec augeatur,
sed sequitur quod sicut in collacione baptismi et
aliorum sacramentorum propter indisposicionem
baptizati, puta si in peccato mortali persistit, potest
contingere quod gracia non conferatur nec eciam
augeatur, ita potest hoc accidere in ordinum et
cuiuscumque dignitatis ecclesiastice suscepcione.

Master: It does not follow from that argument that
grace is neither conferred nor increased when orders
are conferred, but it does follow that, just as it can
happen in the conferring of baptism and other
sacraments that grace is not conferred or also
increased because of the inadequacy of the one to be
baptised, if he persists in mortal sin, for instance, so
this can happen in the obtaining of orders and any
ecclesiastical dignity whatever.

Discipulus Alias raciones adducas?

Student: Would you bring forward other arguments?

Magister Tercia racio est hec: qui non est confirmatus
in fide, si usum habeat racionis, potest errare contra
fidem, sed papa non est confirmatus in fide quia si
esset confirmatus in fide per aliquod donum
supernaturale confirmaretur in fide; sed nullum
supernaturale donum apparet collatum pape per quod
confirmetur in fide. Inter omnia enim dona
supernaturalia que de communi lege puris viatoribus
conferuntur precipua et maxime stabiliencia
recipientem in fide sunt gracia et virtutes theologice,
scilicet fides spes et caritas et dona Spiritus Sancti. Sed
per ista purus viator minime confirmatur in fide, cum
ista perfecciora et maiora sepe inveniantur in aliis
quam in papa qui tamen per ipsa minime confirmantur
in fide. Ergo papa per ista minime confirmatur in fide,
et ideo nullum donum supernaturale collatum ipsum
confirmat in fide quare contra fidem potest errare.

Master: A third argument is this. Whoever has not
been confirmed in faith and has the use of reason can
err against the faith; but the pope has not been
confirmed in faith because if he were confirmed in
faith he would be confirmed in faith by some
supernatural gift, but no supernatural gift by which he
is confirmed in the faith appears to have been
conferred on the pope. For among all the supernatural
gifts which are conferred as a normal right on mere
pilgrims those which particularly and especially make
the recipient strong in faith are grace and the
theological virtues, namely, faith, hope and charity
and the gifts of the holy spirit. But a mere pilgrim is
not confirmed in faith by these since they are often
found to be more perfect and greater in others, who
nevertheless are not confirmed in faith by them, than
in the pope; therefore the pope is not confirmed in
faith by them; and therefore no conferred supernatural

175

