praise). [col. 500] Therefore one must in no way
presume in favour of papal opponents who impute
heretical wickedness to the pope, but one must presume
against them as against slanderers.
Magister: Ad primam istarum instantiarum nonnulli Master: Some attempt to respond to the first of these
respondere nituntur dicentes quod papa tenetur stare instances by saying that the pope is obligated to appear
iudicio si apparuerint aliqui, qui legitima exceptione in court if certain people come forward who cannot be
repelli non possunt, qui eum voluerint de pravitate pushed aside by way of a legitimate exception, and
heretica accusare. Cum enim, ut dicunt, constet aperte indicate a willingness to accuse the pope of heretical
quod papa potest de heresi accusari, patenter infertur wickedness. They say that since it is clearly established
quod aliqui sunt qui valent papam de heresi accusare. that the pope may be accused of heretical wickedness,
Ex quibus sequitur evidenter quod papa in tali casu there is an obvious inference that some people exist who
iudicio stare tenetur, et ideo si iudicium subterfugit may accuse the pope of heresy. It evidently follows from
reddit se suspectum, et est contra ipsum merito these considerations that in such a case the pope is
presumendum.
obligated to appear in court, and therefore if he avoids
judicial process he becomes a suspect and a deserved
presumption is formed against him.
Ad secundam dicitur quod non est semper The reply to the second instance is that one must not
presumendum quod impugnans papam de heretica always presume that an opponent of the pope who
pravitate, sive appellando, sive recusando, sive imputes heretical wickedness to him (either by appealing
accusando, sive testificando, causa invidie moveatur. from him, or by entering a demurrer against him, or by
Nec est semper presumendum quod accusatio ex invidia accusing him, or by testifying against him) is motivated
non ex caritate procedat. Imo nisi apparuerit aliquod by envy. Nor must one always presume that an
indicium invidie speciale, presumendum est quod accusation proceeds from envy and not from love.
accusatio ex caritate fiat, cum accusare etiam prelatum, Indeed, unless some specific evidence of envy emerges,
circumstantiis debitis observatis, ad rectitudinem et Dei one must presume that the accusation is made out of
timorem pertineat, teste Gregorio qui, ut legitur 2 q. 7 c. love, since to accuse even a prelate, appropriate
Sicut, ait: "sicut laudabile discretumque est reverentiam circumstances being taken into account, pertains to
et honorem exhibere prioribus, ita rectitudinis et Dei righteousness and to fear of God, as witnesses Gregory
timoris est, si qua in eis sunt que indigent correctione, who states (we read this in 2 q. 7 c. Sicut): "just as it is
nulla dissimulatione postponere, ne totum (quod absit) worthy of praise and notice to demonstrate respect and
corpus morbus invadat, si languor non fuerit curatus in honour to one's leaders, so is it a matter of righteousness
capite". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod non est and fear of god not to procrastinate or to cover up if
presumendum statim accusationem prelati fieri ex there are things about them which need correction, lest,
invidia, sed ex zelo boni communis.
God forbid, disease should invade the whole body if a
feebleness will not have been healed in its head". [col.
499] From these words we are given to understand that
one must not immediately presume that an accusation is
leveled at a prelate from envy rather than from a zeal for
the common good.
Ad allegationes tuas respondet glossa 2 q. 7 c. Si quis Your arguments are answered by the gloss [col. 708] of
episcopus, super illo verbo "illaudabilis" dicens: "vel dic 2 q. 7 c. Si quis episcopus, which states on the words
illaudabilem quo ad vulgi opinionem. Nam presumitur "not worthy of praise": "or say that it is not worthy of
alias quis bono zelo accusare, ut Extra, De dolo et praise in the opinion of the vulgar. For elsewhere one is
contumacia, c. Veritatis est verbum. Ex caritate enim presumed to accuse from good zeal, as in Extra, De dolo
debet provenire accusatio (Extra, De accusationibus, c. et contumacia, c. Veritatis est verbum. [col. 296] Indeed
Si quis episcopus) et qui accusat publice salutis an accusation must proceed from love (Extra, De
custodiam gerit, ut Cod., De famosis libellis, lege una". accusationibus, c. Si quis episcopus) [col. 231-2] and he
Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod non semper who accuses publicly acts as the custodian of security, as
presumendum est accusationem fieri ex invidia. Imo si in Codex, De famosis libellis, lege una". We gather from
accusans fuit hactenus bone fame, nec apparet quod these words that one must not always presume that an
fuerit inimicus accusati, nec facile litigans, nec vilis aut accusation is made from envy. Indeed if the accuser was
levis persona, sed omni suspicione carens, heretofore a person of good reputation, nor did it appear
presumendum est quod bono zelo accusare proponat. Et that he was an enemy of the accused, nor someone who
consimiliter est dicendum de impugnantibus papam de went to court at the slightest pretext, nor a shallow or
heretica pravitate. Non est enim verisimile quod aliquis contemptible person, but beyond all suspicion, one
bone fame et opinionis, mansuetus et humilis, litigia would have to presume that he intended to make the
minime querens, discretus et providus, se velit periculis accusation from good zeal. And the same must be said of
infinitis exponere papam de pravitate heretica opponents of the pope who impute heretical wickedness
366

