et aliqui adhererent ex una causa, alii ex alia.

variety of causes. Some would join him for one reason,
others for another.
Discipulus: Enumera aliquas causas ex quibus posset Student: List some of the causes which might lead to
accidere.
this situation.
Magister: Dicitur quod una causa ex qua aliqui pape Master: It is said that one cause whereby some would
heretico adhererent est falsa et erronea estimatio quam join the camp of a heretic pope is the false and
habent nonnulli de papa.
erroneous conviction which many have concerning the
papal status.
Discipulus: Que est illa falsa et erronea estimatio.
Student: What is this false and erroneous conviction.
Magister: Respondetur quod est multiplex. Quidam Master: The answer is that it is multifarious. For
enim putant quod papa non potest peccare, instance, some people think that the pope cannot sin, as
quemadmodum quidam Sergiani, ut in quodam libro certain Sergians claimed on behalf of pope Sergius, a
antiquo legi, in favorem Sergii pape tradiderunt. Unde contention I read in a very old book. Hence there are
quidam, ut audivi, hiis temporibus publice dicunt quod some, as I have heard, who are publicly stating in these
papa est deus in terris, non quidem sicut omnes times of ours that the pope is a God on earth, indeed not
sacerdotes dicuntur dii, qui tamen peccare possunt, sed in the sense in which all priests are said to be gods (who
sic ut malefacere nequaquam possit, et in terris omnia nevertheless may commit sins), but with the implication
que vult possit. Quidam putant quod papa contra fidem that he can in no way do wrong, and that he may do on
errare non potest. Quidam putant quod licet papa earth everything that he wants. Others believe that the
peccare et errare possit contra fidem, de omnibus tamen pope cannot err against the faith. Still others believe that
que facit debemus supponere quod sint bene facta, et de although the pope may sin and err against the faith, we
nullo quod facit licet nobis iudicare quod sit male must nevertheless assume that all the things that he has
factum. Quidam putant quod licet valeamus reputare done have been done well, and that nothing that he does
aliqua facta pape esse mala et male facta, tamen nulli may we judge as having been done wrongly. Some think
licet christiano papam arguere vel iudicare, that although we may consider that some things done by
reprehendere, aut aliquam contra eum iudicialiter ferre the pope are bad and done badly, nevertheless no
sententiam. Et ex hiis quattuor estimationibus falsis de Christian is allowed to question or to judge the pope, to
papa, et ex qualibet illarum, accideret quod, papa effecto rebuke him, or to pass legal sentence against him. And
heretico, ei christiani aliqui adhererent.
from these four false convictions about the papal status,
or from any single one of them, it might happen that
some Christians would join the camp of a pope who had
become a heretic.
Discipulus: Prime due estimationes false michi Student: The first two convictions appear to me to be
videntur. De quarta autem tractatum est prius. Ideo dic false, while the fourth has been dealt with earlier. [Cf. 1
secundum istos in quo tertia estimatio a veritate recedit. Dial. 6.1ss] State therefore in what way, according to
these thinkers, the third conviction deviates from the
truth.
Magister: Dicitur quod quantum ad omnia que non Master: The answer is that this conviction contradicts
possunt bono animo fieri est contraria veritati. Quicquid the truth with respect to all things which cannot be done
enim papa fecerit quod non potest bono animo fieri, nec with a good conscience. For whatever the pope will
recta intentione, licet cuilibet hoc scienti iudicare de have done which cannot be done with a good conscience
papa quod male facit et inique, et quod peccat mortaliter. or with right intention, anyone who knows this is
Unde si viderem papam fornicantem, vel simoniam permitted to judge as having been done wrongly and
committentem, vel mentientem in doctrina religionis aut criminally on the part of the pope, and as constituting
in proximi nocumentum, vel innocentem aliquem the pope in a state of mortal sin. Hence, were I to see the
diffamantem, vel aliquid contra Deum precipientem, aut pope involving himself in fornication, or committing
aliquid huiusmodi, liceret michi et deberem iudicare, simony, or lying about religious doctrine, or lying with
non quidem iudicialiter sed certa credulitate, papam harmful consequences to his neighbour, or defaming
peccare mortaliter.
some innocent person, or uttering some command
against God or something of this kind, I would have
both the right and the duty to judge that the pope had
committed a mortal sin, and while my judgement would
not carry legal effect it would possess indubitable
cognitive consequences.
Discipulus: Secundum istam sententiam ita passim Student: According to this principle, I would be
liceret iudicare de papa quod malefaciat sicut de allowed to constantly pass judgement on the pope's
quocunque alio christiano.
misdeeds as much as on those of any other Christian.
Magister: Respondetur quod non, quia multa licent Master: The reply is negative, because many things are
480

