superstitione habebant adversus eum et de quodam Iesu none of these things whereof these accuse me, no man
defuncto quem affirmabat Paulus vivere. Hesitans autem may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Caesar". [Acts
ego de huiusmodi questione dicebans si vellet ire 25:8-11] And afterwards, speaking of the Jews who were
Hierosolimam et ibi iudicari de istis. Paulo autem accusing Paul, Festus said: "therefore, when they were
appellante ut servaretur ad Augusti cognitionem iussi come hither, without any delay on the morrow I sat on
servari eum donec mittam eum ad Cesarem". Ex hiis the judgement seat, and commanded the man to be
colliguntur duo. Primum est quod pro illa questione que brought forth. Against whom when the accusers stood
vertebatur inter iudeos et Paulum Paulus Cesarem up, they brought none accusation of such things as I
appellavit. Secundum est quod super fide Christi inter supposed: But had certain questions against him of their
ipsos questio vertebatur. Ex quibus sequitur quod pro own superstition and of one Jesus, which was dead,
causa fidei Paulus Cesarem appellavit.
whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And because I doubted
of such manner of questions, I asked him whether he
would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these
matters. But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto
the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till
I might send him to Caesar". [Acts 25:17-21] From these
we gather two things. The first is that Paul appealed to
Caesar with respect to the question which was in
contention between Paul and the Jews. The second is that
the question concerning which they contended was about
the Christian faith. From these it follows that Paul
appealed to Caesar for a cause of faith.
Capitulum 21
Chapter 21
Discipulus: Stuporem michi predicta ingerunt Student: What you have stated leaves me in utter
vehementem, quia pene incredibile michi videtur quod amazement, because it seems almost unbelievable to me
pro causa fidei in quocunque casu ad hominem contrarie that it might be permissible to appeal for a cause of faith
secte liceat appellare. Et tamen apparenter ostenditur under any circumstance to a person of a contrary
quod Paulus pro causa fidei Cesarem qui erat secte religious persuasion. And nevertheless it is apparently
contrarie appellavit. Ex quo sequi videtur quod non shown that Paul appealed for a cause of faith to Caesar,
esset inconveniens ad papam hereticum appellare, et per who was of a contrary religion. From which it seems to
consequens appellare ab eo non licet quia pro eadem follow that it would not be inconvenient to appeal to a
causa non est ab eodem et ad eundem appellandum, et heretic pope, and consequently that it is not permitted to
ita predicte assertioni que dicit quod licet a papa appeal from such a pope because one must not appeal to
heretico appellare contrariari videtur. Unde quomodo ad and from the same person for the same cause, and so this
istam contrarietatem respondere contingat enarra.
appears to contradict the aforementioned assertion which
states that it is permitted to appeal from a heretic pope.
Magister: Pro dissolvenda contrarietate prefata dicunt Master: Some say (in order to resolve this contradiction)
quidam esse notandum quod dupliciter contingit ad that it must be noted that there are two ways in which
aliquem pro causa fidei appellare. Uno modo quidem one can appeal to someone for a cause of faith. A first
tanquam ad illum qui habet questiones motas de fide way is to appeal to him as to someone who has the
iuxta sanam doctrinam ex officio terminare, et isto official function of determining questions raised about
modo ad nullum hominem alterius secte sive fuerit the faith; and one must not appeal in this manner for a
paganus sive hereticus est pro causa fidei appellandum, cause of faith to anyone of a contrary religion (whether
quia ad solos summos pontifices catholicos et fideles ac pagan or heretic), because the determination of questions
generale concilium catholicorum spectat questiones of faith belongs only to catholic and faithful supreme
fidei terminare, sicut ex sacris canonibus patenter pontiffs, and to a general council of catholics, as is
apparet. Aliter contingit aliquem ad alium pro causa clearly apparent from the sacred canons. There is another
fidei appellare, non quidem sicut ad illum qui habet way in which someone may appeal to another for a cause
causas fidei terminare, sed tanquam ad illum qui ex of faith, not indeed as to an instance which has the right
officio vel ex electione appellantis aut alio quovis modo to determine causes of faith, but as to one which (by
potest cognoscere an appellans debeat pro causa function of office or by election of the appellant or by
huiusmodi ab emulis accusari vel in iudicio a quo any other method) can judicially investigate whether an
appellerat conveniri. Sic dicunt quod si aliquis super appellant might be accused by his enemies about such a
aliquo dubio fidei quod non est certum esse heresis nec cause or be legally summoned for a hearing in the court
est heresis dampnata explicite licet sit heresis dampnata from which he had appealed. And so they say that were
implicite accusaretur coram episcopo, talis pro someone to be accused before a bishop about a doubtful
questione huiusmodi posset ad metropolitanum issue in the faith concerning which there was no certain
appellare. Non quidem tanquam ad illum qui habet tale heresy involved nor a heresy explicitly condemned (even
dubium diffinire, sed tanquam ad illum ad quem spectat if it was a heresy implicitly condemned), the accused
308

