omnes veritates sunt catholicae iudicandae, quod
beatus Augustinus in Encheridion expresse determinat.
Quaerit autem quae sunt illae veritates quae catholicae
sunt censendae.

that not all truths should be adjudged catholic, which
blessed Augustine expressly lays down in his
Enchiridion. It seeks to know, however, which are
those truths that should be considered catholic.

Discipulus Cum beato Augustino illud quod supponit
questio firmiter teneamus, et circa quaesitum
sententiam unam vel plures enarra.

Student Let us, with blessed Augustine, firmly hold
what the question supposes, and tell me one opinion,
or more, about what I seek to know.

First opinion: Catholic truth is found in the Bible alone
Magister Circa quaesitum sunt diversae et adversae
sententiae. Quarum una est quod illae solae veritates
sunt reputandae catholicae de necessitate salutis
credendae quae in canone Bibliae explicite vel
implicite asseruntur, ita quod si aliquae veritates in
Biblia sub forma propria minime continentur, ex solis
contentis tamen in ea consequentia necessaria et
formali possunt inferri sunt inter catholicas
numerandae. Sicut haec veritas, "Christus est verus
Deus et verus homo" in tota Scriptura Divina sub hac
serie verborum nullatenus invenitur, quia tamen ex
contentis in Scriptura Sacra consequentia necessaria et
formali concluditur catholica est censenda et eam
credere est necessarium ad salutem. Omnes autem aliae
veritates quae nec in Biblia sunt insertae nec ex
contentis in ea consequentia necessaria et formali
possunt inferri, licet in scriptis sanctorum vel in
diffinitionibus summorum pontificum asserantur aut
etiam ab omnibus fidelibus teneantur, non sunt
catholicae reputandae, nec est necessarium ad salutem
eis per fidem firmiter adhaerere vel propter eas
rationem et humanum ingenium captivare.

Master There are different and opposing opinions
about what you seek to know. One of these is that
only those truths should be regarded as catholic and as
requiring belief out of necessity for salvation which
are asserted explicitly or implicitly in the canon of the
bible, so that if some truths are not contained in the
bible in that exact form, yet can be inferred by
necessary and formal inference from matters
contained solely in it, they should be counted as
catholic, just as the truth, "Christ is true God and true
man", is not found in this sequence of words
anywhere in divine scripture, yet because it is a
conclusion by necessary and formal inference from
things contained in sacred scripture it is to be
considered catholic and belief in it is necessary for
salvation. All other truths, however, which are neither
inserted in the bible nor can be inferred from what is
contained in it as a formal and necessary consequence,
even if they are asserted in the writings of the saints or
in the definitions of the highest pontiffs or even if they
are held by all the faithful, should not be regarded as
catholic, and it is not necessary for salvation firmly to
cling to them through faith or on account of them to
take captive reason and human ingenuity. [Cf.
Marsilius, DP II.xix. However, Marsilius also holds
that the scriptural interpretations of general councils
must also be believed.]

Hanc suam sententiam auctoritatibus et rationibus
confirmare nituntur. Auctoritas prima est Salomonis
Proverbiorum 30 c. qui ait, "Omnis sermo Dei ignitus
clypeus est sperantibus in se; ne addas quicquam verbis
illius et arguaris inveniarisque mendax." Ex quibus
verbis colligitur quod verbis divinis quae in Scriptura
Divina habentur nihil penitus est addendum tanquam
necessarium ad credendum. Hoc etiam testari videtur
Moyses Deuteronomii 4 c. et beatus Iohannes
Apocalypsis ultimo, quorum verba supra c. 2 sunt
adducta. Ex quibus datur intelligi quod sicut de
Scriptura Sacra nihil est penitus auferendum, ita ei
omnino nihil est addendum tanquam necessarium ad
salutem.

They try to confirm this opinion of theirs by [citing]
texts and by arguments. The first text is from the
Proverbs of Solomon 30:[5-6] which says, "Every
word of God is fire tried; he is a buckler to them that
hope in him. Add not anything to his words, lest thou
be reproved and found a liar." We gather from these
words that nothing at all should be added, as though it
were necessary that it be believed, to the divine words
that are found in divine scripture. Moses also seems to
attest to this in Deuteronomy 4 and blessed John in the
last chapter of Revelation, whose words were adduced
above in chapter 2 [of the first book]. We are given to
understand from these that, just as nothing at all
should be removed from sacred scripture, so nothing
at all should be added to it as necessary for salvation.

Hanc etiam sententiam auctoritatibus beati Augustini
conantur ostendere. Augustinus enim in quadam

They also try to make this opinion known by texts of
blessed Augustine. For in a certain letter to Jerome,

23

