quod memoriam libri Regum tunc actualiter non clung to his statement, would have been a manifest
habebat. Unde super verbo 'Achab' dicit glossa: heretic. If therefore he was not a heretic, this happened
"confundit historiam, non enim Achab misit illos because he stated the mentioned heresy as an opinion,
quinquagenarios sed rex Ochozias, nec etiam illud out of sheer ignorance and without any pertinacity,
contingit tempore Achab, sed illud contingit sub something he became involved in because at that
Ochozia". Et ita patet quod etiam glossa negat textum moment he did not actually remember the exact words
libri decretorum. Glossa etiam in pluribus locis reprobat of the Book of Kings. Whence the gloss states on the
Gratianum, sicut patet 11 q. 3 # Evidenter itaque, et 2 q. word "Achab": "he [Gratian] confuses historical events,
3 # 1, et in aliis locis pluribus. Et ideo dicunt quod multo for it is not Achab who sent these fifty-year-old men,
fortius licet negare glossas que, ut dicunt, nonnunquam but king Ochozias, nor did this event occur in the time
divine scripture repugnant. Interdum etiam canonicas of Achab, but all this happened under Ochozias". [col.
sanctiones allegant inepte, quod, ut dicunt, ex hoc 1316] And so it is clear that even a gloss negates the
accidit quod glossatores in scripturis sacris et scientiis text of the canon law book. The gloss texts also criticize
philosophicis nequaquam periti fuerunt, et ideo Gratian in many contexts, which is clear in 11 q. 3 #
quamplura capitula iuris canonici ex scripturis divinis et Evidenter itaque, [Gratian, dictum post c. 24, col. 651.
originalibus sanctorum accepta nequaquam profunde et Cf. gloss s.v. ab ingressu, and s.v. Item Gregorius, col.
perfecte intelligere potuerunt.
932] and in 2 q. 3 # 1, [Gratian, dictum ante c. 1, col.
451. Cf gloss s.v. quia autem est notandum, col. 632]
and in many other places. And therefore these thinkers
say that one is permitted even more to negate glosses
which, as they say, are sometimes inconsistent with
Divine Scripture. Glosses occasionally even cite
canonical decisions in argument incompetently, which,
they say, is due to the fact that the authors of these
glosses were not learned in the Sacred Scriptures and in
the philosophical sciences, and therefore could not
understand deeply and perfectly many chapters of canon
law which were borrowed from the Divine Scriptures
and from the writings of saints.
Aliter dicitur quod glossa predicta non dicit receptatores Another approach is to say that the gloss in question
hereticorum gravius delinquere quam hereticos et does not state that receivers of heretics commit a more
consimiliter puniendos, sed transeundo de receptatoribus serious crime than the heretics and must receive a
hereticorum ad defensores hereticorum, dicit defensores similar punishment, but, making a transition from
hereticorum gravius puniendos et gravius delinquere, receivers of heretics to defenders of heretics, the gloss
quod bene intellectum de defensoribus hereticorum states that defenders of heretics are to be punished more
continet veritatem.
severely and commit a more serious crime, and this,
well understood, is indeed true with respect to defenders
of heretics.
Capitulum 69
Chapter 69
Discipulus: Post inquisitionem distinctam licet propter Student: After this specific investigation concerning
amplitudinem materie brevem de credentibus, believers, abettors, defenders, and receivers of heretics,
fautoribus, defensoribus, et receptatoribus hereticorum, brief though it was due to the abundance of the material,
peto ut absque probationibus magnis, causa prolixitatis I ask that you examine by reference to some opinion,
vitande, dicas secundum aliquam opinionem an omnes but without major probative arguments so as to avoid
credentes, et similiter omnes fautores, et omnes unwelcome length in the presentation, whether all
defensores, et omnes receptatores pape heretice et believers, and similarly all abettors, and all defenders,
aliorum hereticorum sint equaliter reprehensibiles and all receivers of a heretic pope and of other heretics,
iudicandi.
are to be judged equally reprehensible.
Magister: Respondetur quod aliquos esse magis vel Master: The answer is that there are two ways of
minus aut equaliter reprehensibiles iudicandos dupliciter understanding that some are to be judged as more, or
potest intelligi, scilicet, secundum iudicium divinum, et less, or equally reprehensible, namely, by reference to
humanum. Secundum iudicium divinum, illi sunt magis divine judgement, and by reference to human
reprehensibiles iudicandi qui ex maiori contemptu Dei judgement. According to divine judgement, they are to
vel ex maiori negligentia peccant in aliquo predictorum. be judged more reprehensible who sin in one of the
Hoc autem est notum soli Deo.
mentioned situations with greater contempt of God or
with greater negligence. However, this is known only to
God.
Discipulus: Non intendebam querere nisi qui essent Student: I did not intend to inquire about any save
reprehensibiles iudicandi secundum humanum iudicium, those who would be judged reprehensible according to
473

