hereticus ipso facto iure divino non humano est papatu he is instantly deprived of the papacy by divine law (not
privatus et inferior factus catholicis.
by human law) and becomes inferior to catholics.
Discipulus: Allega primo pro assertione in qua diversi Student: Begin with representations for the assertion
conveniunt scilicet quod papa non habet iudicem with which these [latter] opposite parties agree, namely,
superiorem in terris.
that the pope has no superior judge on earth.
Magister: Hoc auctoritatibus et rationibus nonnulli Master: Many attempt to prove this by authorities and
probare conantur. Hoc enim Innocentius papa ut habetur arguments. Indeed, Pope Innocent seems to hold this
9 q. 3 c. Nemo sentire videtur, ait enim: "nemo iudicabit view for he states in 9 q. 1 c. Nemo [col. 610] that "no
primam sedem iustitiam temperare desiderantem, neque one is to judge the first see when it is establishing
enim ab augusto neque ab omni clero neque a regibus justice; the judge will be judged neither by the emperor,
neque a populo iudex iudicabitur". Ex quibus verbis nor by all the clergy, nor by kings nor by the people".
datur intelligi quod etiam universalis ecclesia non est One gathers from these words that even the universal
papa superior cum clerus et populus qui secundum church is not the pope's superior, since it is made up of
predicta verba Innocentii papam nequeant iudicare the very clergy and people who, according to the cited
ecclesiam universalem constituant. Ex quo sequitur words of Innocent, are not competent to judge the pope.
quod etiam concilium generale non est supra papam. From which it follows that the general council is
Item, Symachus papa ut habetur eisdem causa et likewise not above the pope. Again: Pope Symachus
questione c. Aliorum, ait: "aliorum hominum causas states (we have it in c. Aliorum [col. 610] of the same
Deus voluit terminare per homines sedis istius presulem canon law context): "God willed that the cases of other
suo sine questione reservavit arbitrio". Ex quo habetur men were to be decided by men; He reserved without
quod solus Deus est superior presule sedis apostolice. question the head of this see for His own judgment".
From this one concludes that God alone is superior to
the head of the Apostolic see.
Discipulus: Dicerent alii quod Symachus papa loquitur Student: Others would say that Pope Symachus is
de aliis causis quam de causis heresis, et ideo, non speaking of cases other than cases of heresy and
obstantibus verbis eiusdem, papa habet superiorem in therefore, notwithstanding his words, the pope has a
causis heresis.
superior in cases of heresy.
Magister: Ista responsio impugnatur quia sicut ex dictis Master: This response is challenged because, as one
sanctorum patrum colligitur, ubi canon non excipit nec gathers from statements by holy fathers, where a canon
nos debemus excipere, cum ergo canon Symachi pape makes no exception neither must we. Since the canon of
causam heresis nequaquam excipiat nec nos causam Pope Symachus by no means excepts the case of heresy,
heresis debemus excipere. Hoc etiam patet quia verba we cannot except this case either. The same point is
indistincte prolata generaliter debent intelligi, ut papa in evident from the dictum that words stated indistinctly
omni causa divino servetur arbitrio. Tertia auctoritas ad must be understood comprehensively, and hence the
predictam assertionem est Antheri pape qui ut in pope is to be reserved for divine judgment in every case.
predictis causa et quaestione c. Facta , ait: "facta The third authority in support of the aforecited assertion
subditorum iudicantur a nobis, nostra vero a Domino is that of Pope Antherius (in the same context [col. 610iudicantur". Papa ergo superiorem iudicem non habet in 611] at c. Facta) who declares: "the deeds of subjects
terris. Quarta auctoritas est Constantini imperatoris qui, are judged by us, but our deeds are judged by the Lord".
ut legitur 12 q. 1 c. Futuram "presidens sancte synodo Therefore the pope has no superior judge on earth. The
que apud Nicenam congregata est, cum querelam fourth authority is that of Emperor Constantine. We read
quorundam coram se conspiceret deferendam ait: 'vos a in 12 q. 1 c. Futuram [col. 682] that "presiding over the
nemine diiudicari potestis quia Dei solius iudicio holy synod which was gathered at Nicea, when he
reservamini, dii etenim vocati estis et idcirco non [Constantine] noticed that a dispute between some
potestis ab hominibus iudicari'". Ex quibus verbis datur [bishops] was on the verge of being brought before him
intelligi quod clerici non possunt a laicis iudicari et per for judgment, he said: 'you may be judged by no one,
consequens multo fortius caput clericorum scilicet because you are reserved for the judgment of God alone,
summus pontifex nequit ab alio iudicari.
for you are called 'gods' and thus you cannot be judged
by men'". From these words we understand that clerks
cannot be judged by laymen, and consequently all the
more strongly the head of the clerks, namely the
supreme pontiff, cannot be judged by another.
Quinta auctoritas ad idem est Gelasii pape qui ut The fifth authority in favour of the same assertion is that
habetur 9 q. 3 c. Ipsi loquens de apostolica sede ait: of Pope Gelasius. Speaking of the Apostolic see (we
"ipsi sunt canones qui appellationes totius ecclesie ad have this in 9 q. 3 c. Ipsi)[col. 611] he states: "these are
huius sedis examen voluerunt deferre, ab ipsa vero the canons which willed the referral of appeals from the
nunquam prorsus appellare debere sanxerunt, ac per hoc entire church to the scrutiny of this see, while decreeing
illam de tota ecclesia iudicare, ipsam ad nullius that at no time was it ever allowed to appeal therefrom,
commeare iudicium nec de eius umquam preceperunt and thereby these [canons] ordered that this see was to
268

