superior non defendendo auctoritatem prestat, et ideo judge and superior provides authority by omitting to
incidit in excommunicationis sententiam.
defend, and therefore falls into a sentence of
excommunication.
Discipulus: Hec sententia non videtur sufficiens, quia si Student: This solution does not seem sufficient, because
iudex non defendendo auctoritatem prestat, eadem if a judge provides authority by omitting to defend, then
ratione socius non defendendo causam vel occasionem by the same token a partner by not defending provides a
prestat. Qui autem causam prestat vel occasionem, ita reason or an opportunity. And one who provides reason
punitur sicut faciens, sicut qui occasionem dampni dat or opportunity is subject to the same punishment as the
dampnum dedisse videtur (Extra, De iniuriis et dampno doer, just as he who provides the opportunity for a loss
dato, Si culpa). Ergo si iudex qui non defendit clericum appears responsible for the loss itself (Extra, de iniuriis
verberatum sententiam excommunicationis incurrit, et et dampno dato, Si culpa). [col. 880] Therefore if a judge
quilibet alius qui non defendit clericum, cum potest, who does not defend a battered clerk incurs the penalty
excommunicationis sententia innodatur.
of excommunication, then likewise anyone else who
does not defend a clerk when he can is involved in a
penalty of excommunication.
Magister: Tu tangis unum motivum fundamentale Master: You are touching on a fundamental motive of
quorundam dicentium quod quilibet qui potest debet some, who say that anyone who can do so must defend
defendere impugnantes papam hereticum, quamvis the opponents of a heretic pope, even if he does not
nesciat papam esse hereticum.
know that the pope is a heretic.
Discipulus: Ex quo istud est unum de motivis illorum, Student: Since this is one of their motives, I believe that
maiorem tractatum de isto usque ad illam materiam a more extensive treatment of it should be postponed
censeo differendum. Tamen nunc dic breviter quomodo until the entire issue comes up for discussion. But do
per glossam predictam ad hoc respondere contingat.
state briefly at this time how one responds to this on the
basis of the gloss we are analyzing.
Magister: Potest dici quod quamvis sive iudex sive Master: It can be said that although either a judge or
alius qui clericum non defendat, si potest, mortaliter someone else who does not defend a clerk (if he can)
peccat, ex lege tamen nature neuter sententiam commits a mortal sin, neither of them for all that incurs
excommunicationis incurrit, quia pena excomunicationis the penalty of excommunication by the law of nature,
solummodo ex iure positivo infligitur. Pene autem iuris because the penalty of excommunication is only inflicted
positivi sunt restringende et nullatenus ampliande. Et by positive law. And the penalties of positive law must
ideo, salva lege positiva, sententia excommunicationis be limited, not expanded. Therefore, without prejudice to
lata per canonem contra non defendentes clericum ad positive law, a sentence of excommunication established
pauciores quantum permittit canon debet extendi. Cum by a canon against those who do not defend a clerk
ergo canon predictus Quante salvari possit intelligendo covers as few persons as the canon allows. And since the
ipsum tantummodo de potestatem et iurisdictionem canon in question (Quante) may retain its validity if one
habentibus, qui gravius peccant non defendendo quam understands it as applying only to those who possess
alii, de aliis non debet intelligi, licet alii non defendentes power and jurisdiction (for they sin more seriously than
clericum, cum possunt, peccant mortaliter.
others when they do not provide defense), it must not be
understood of others, although these others who do not
defend a clerk when they can commit a mortal sin.
Discipulus: Dic ad tertiam obiectionem.
Student: Respond to the third objection.
Magister: Ad tertiam respondetur quod hec non est vera Master: The answer to the third objection is that there is
'nullus tenetur ad illud pro quo potest ex pacto pecuniam no truth in the proposition that 'no one is obligated to do
recipere'. Si quis enim videret alium in articulo extreme something for which he may be remunerated by
necessitatis ex fame, posset licite vendere sibi panem, et contract'. Indeed were someone to see another in a
tamen si alius non haberet unde emeret vel etiam nollet, situation of extreme necessity due to hunger, he would
teneretur sibi gratis dare panem pro vita sustentanda. Si be entitled to sell him a loaf of bread, and nevertheless if
tamen in necessitate constitutus extrema haberet unde the latter had no means of paying or even refused to pay,
emere sibi necessaria vite ab aliis, a quibus posset the former would be obligated to give him the loaf of
emptione sibi acquirere necessaria vite, iste non bread for nothing in order to save his life. But if the
teneretur sibi gratis necessaria exhibere. Sic in proposito individual in extreme necessity did have the means of
licet recipere pecuniam pro defensione socii si socius acquiring the necessities of life from others from whom
potest et vult dare pecuniam, vel apparet alius qui potest he might proceed to buy these necessities, then the
et vult eum defendere, vel ipse potest defendere former would not be bound to provide him with
semetipsum. Si autem ipse non potest semetipsum necessities for nothing. The analogy holds for the
defendere, vel non potest aut non vult dare pecuniam problem under review. One is permitted to receive
pro defensione sua, alius tenetur eum defendere absque money for defending a partner if the partner is able and
pecunia. Poterit tamen postea petere ab eo pecuniam et willing to pay, or if someone else appears who is able
alius sibi dare tenebitur.
and willing to defend him, or if the partner is able to
346

