'ego sum hostium, per me si quis introierit etc.'". made a whip of thin cords, he expelled the buyers and
Predictum ergo officium quod Christus tunc exercuit ad sellers from the temple. Indeed he explains his janitor
hostiarios spectat. Hostiarii autem ex officio suo nullam function when he says 'I am the door. If someone enters
iurisdictionem coactivam noscuntur habere. Ergo per through me etc. [John 10:9]'" Therefore the aforestated
illud exemplum probare non potes quod Christus office which Christ then exercised pertains to janitors.
iurisdictionem habuit coactivam. Secundo dicunt te But janitors are known to possess no coercive
errare quia Christus in quantum summus sacerdos si jurisdiction by their function. Thus you cannot prove by
habuit iurisdictionem non habuit eam nisi respectu this example that Christ had coercive jurisdiction.
fidelium et in eum credentium quia ad eum de hiis qui Second: they say you are wrong because even if Christ
foris erant in quantum summus sacerdos non pertinuit had possessed jurisdiction as high priest, he would not
iudicare. Christus autem tunc eiecit infideles de templo, have had it except with respect to the faithful and to
igitur hoc non fecit in quantum sacerdos sed in quantum those who believed in him, for it would not have been
hostiarius cuius est absque iurisdictione non solum his function as high priest to pass judgment on religious
malos fideles sed etiam infideles de templo eiicere. Ex outsiders. And at the time Christ had [also] expelled
hiis concludunt quod Christus in quantum sacerdos unbelievers from the temple. Therefore he did not do
nunquam iurisdictionem exercuit coactivam, ergo non this as a priest but as a janitor, to whom it pertains (with
habuit.
no jurisdiction attached) to expel from the temple not
only sinful believers but also those who are not of the
faith. From these points they conclude that Christ as a
priest never exercised coercive jurisdiction, therefore he
did not have it.
Discipulus: Licet Christus habuerit iurisdictionem Student: Although Christ did have coercive jurisdiction
coactivam eam tamen nequaquam exercuit quia inter he by no means exercised it, because there were no
suos discipulos non erant malefici in quos debuit wrongdoers among his disciples against whom he would
iurisdictionem coactivam exercere, nec tamen propter have had the duty to use coercive jurisdiction. This did
hoc caruit iurisdictione tali, sicut si rex non haberet not mean that he lacked such jurisdiction. After all, if a
subditos nisi bonos non propter hoc iurisdictione king only had law-abiding subjects he would not on that
careret.
account lack jurisdiction.
Magister: Istud excludunt per hoc quod nonnulli Master: They reject your response in this way. A
discipuli Christi graviter deliquerunt apostatantes a fide number of Christ's disciples gravely misbehaved,
quam susceperant. Ioh. enim 6 sic legitur: "multi becoming apostates from the faith they had accepted.
discipulorum eius abierunt retro". Non ergo propter For we read in John 6[:66] that "many of his disciples
defectum materie sed propter iurisdictionis coactive went back". It is therefore not due to an absence of
carentiam Christus in delinquentes potestatem aut punishable deeds but because of his lack of coercive
vindictam nequaquam exercuit. Ex hiis concludunt quod jurisdiction that Christ never exercised power or
Christus in quantum summus pontifex iurisdictionem retribution upon the delinquents. From which they
non habuit coactivam. Ergo nec papa iurisdictionem conclude that Christ as high priest did not possess
obtinet coactivam, quod etiam auctoritatibus probare coercive jurisdiction. Therefore neither does the pope
nituntur. Origenes enim super illud Matth. 20 "reges obtain coercive jurisdiction. They attempt to prove this
gentium etc." ait: "scitis quia principes gentium contention by further authorities. Thus, Origen on the
dominantur eorum, id est non contenti tantum regere text of Matthew 20[:25-26] "the princes of the gentiles
suos subiectos violenter eis dominari nituntur. Inter vos etc." states: " 'Ye know that the princes of the gentiles
autem qui estis mei non erunt hec quoniam sicut omnia exercise dominion over them', that is to say not satisfied
carnalia in necessitate sint posita spiritualia autem in with merely governing their subjects they attempt to
voluntate sic et qui principes sunt spirituales id est violently dominate them. 'But it shall not be so among
prelati principatus eorum in dilectione debet esse you' who are mine. For just as all material things are in
positus non in timore". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi the realm of necessity while spiritual things are of free
quod totus principatus prelatorum ecclesie et per will, so those who are spiritual princes, that is prelates,
consequens summi pontificis in voluntate et dilectione must possess a rulership based on love and not on fear".
non in timore debet consistere. Igitur diligi debent non [Marsilius, II.iv.13] From these words we gather that the
timeri. Qui autem iurisdictione coactiva utuntur a malis whole rulership of the prelates of the church (and
timentur, teste Apostolo ad Rom. 13 qui ait: "si autem consequently of the supreme pontiff) must consist in
malefeceris time" scilicet potestatem. Ergo prelati love, not in fear. Therefore they must be loved, not
ecclesiarum iurisdictione coactiva uti non debent.
feared. But those who use coercive jurisdiction are
feared by evildoers, witness the Apostle in Romans
13[:4], who states: "But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid" namely, of authority. Therefore the prelates of
churches must not use coercive jurisdiction.
Hoc etiam Chrysostomus ibidem sentire videtur, ait Chrysostomus also appears to express a similar opinion
272

