opiniones exprimere.
arguments are explicitly dealt with.
Discipulus: Dic que sunt ille opiniones.
Student: State the nature of these opinions.
Magister: Sicut tactum est prius sunt quidam dicentes Master: As we touched upon earlier there are some who
quod Romanus pontifex nullam iurisdictionem habet vel say that the Roman pontiff has no more jurisdiction or
potestatem ex ordinatione Christi ultra alios quoscunque authority by Christ's ordination than other priests of
presbiteros sed omnem dignitatem suam et potestatem whatever category [Marsilius, II.xv; 1 Dial. 5.17], but
ultra alios habuit ab imperatore vel ab ecclesia seu that he received every single dignity of his and power
concilio generali. Alii dicunt quod beatus Petrus pro se beyond that of the other priests from the emperor [1
et suis successoribus dignitatem papalem et primatum Dial. 5.18] or from the church [1 Dial. 5.15]or the
super omnes alios fideles recepit a Christo, sed ista general council [Marsilius, II.xxii; 1 Dial. 5.19]. Others
dignitas et primatus ut dicunt consistit tantummodo in say that blessed Peter did receive from Christ for himself
ordinando et preficiendo episcopos presbiteros et and for his successors the papal dignity and primacy
doctores populo christiano, nullam habens ex over all the other faithful; but, they say, this dignity and
ordinatione Christi iurisdictionem coactivam annexam primacy only consists in the ordination and appointment
sicut nec habet res temporales annexas. Sed sicut of bishops, priests, and doctors for the Christian people,
papatus temporalia a fidelibus orthodoxis accepit ita a and has no annexed coercive jurisdiction from Christ's
communitate fidelium solummodo habuit iurisdictionem dispensation just as it has no annexed temporal
coactivam. Omnis enim communitas potest aliquem sibi possessions. But just as the papacy received temporal
preficere qui habeat potestatem maleficos cohercendi. goods from the orthodox faithful so did it obtain
Ecclesia autem fidelium ad hoc officium papam sibi coercive jurisdiction exclusively from this community.
prefecit, in nullo tamen iurisdictionem imperatorum For every community may appoint someone over itself
diminuendo etiam paganorum, quia hoc non potuit eo with power to coerce evil-doers; and for that purpose the
quod omnes catholici tunc temporis imperatoribus church of the faithful appointed the pope over itself,
infidelibus subiecti fuerunt.
while in no way diminishing the jurisdiction even of
pagan emperors: it could in fact not do this given that at
the time all catholics were subjected to unbelieving
emperors.
Discipulus: Ego omnino vellem exire istam materiam Student: I should entirely like to move away from this
de iurisdictione imperatoris et ad alium differre material concerning the emperor's jurisdiction and defer
tractatum, et tu semper plus et plus trahis ad ipsam, it until another treatise, but you consistently pull towards
unde istis omnibus omissis breviter narra quomodo ad it more and more. Hence, putting aside all these
auctoritates et rationes inductas respondetur.
problems, give a brief account of the manner in which
opponents respond to the authorities and arguments
which have been put forward.
Magister: Sunt quidam unam responsionem dantes Master: There are some who give a single general
generalem ad omnes auctoritates asserentes quod papa response to all the authorities which claim that the pope
habet iurisdictionem super imperatores et reges et quod has jurisdiction over emperor and kings, and that he is
quantum ad iurisdictionem est superior eis, dicentes superior to them as to jurisdiction. They say that such
quod tales auctoritates non continent veritatem et ideo authorities do not contain the truth and are therefore in
sunt nullatenus admittende. Alii autem intellectum no way admissible. Others however believe that the
sanctorum patrum reputant consonum veritati sed dicunt understanding of the holy fathers is consonant with the
quod nonnulli clerici ambitione et avaritia excecati truth, but they say that many clerks, blinded by ambition
verba eorum nimis large contra mentem eorum and avarice, have interpreted their words too broadly and
interpretati sunt.
against the fathers' intended meaning.
Discipulus: Istorum responsiones volo audire.
Student: These are the people whose responses I want
to hear.
Magister: Isti ad evidentiam responsionum suarum Master: For the purpose of clarifying their responses
dicunt esse sciendum quod penitentia unum est de they say that one must grasp the fact that penance is
ecclesiasticis sacramentis et ideo pertinet ad prelatos. counted among the ecclesiastical sacraments and
Quare ad ipsos spectat in foro conscientie penitentium therefore pertains to prelates. Consequently it is their
peccata cognoscere et ipsis debitam penam iniungere. Et function to learn the sins of penitents in the forum of
propter istam potestatem quam sacerdotes in foro conscience {the confessional} and to impose upon them
conscientie habere noscuntur omnes christiani eis sunt an appropriate penalty. And because of this power which
subiecti. Extra autem forum conscientie nullam habent priests are known to possess in the forum of conscience
iurisdictionem a Christo immediate, sed illam habent a all Christians are subject to them; while outside of the
communitate fidelium vel ab illo in quem communitas forum of conscience priests have no jurisdiction from
fidelium suam transtulit potestatem.
Christ immediately, but they obtain it from the
community of believers or from the one to whom the
community of believers has transferred its power.
282

