hereticum defensare.

others who are willing and able to defend the cause of
faith against a heretic pope.
Discipulus: Adducas rationes alias si tibi occurrunt.
Student: Present additional arguments if they occur to
you.
Magister: Octava ratio est hec. Sicut ad accusatorem Master: The eighth argument is this. Just as it pertains to
spectat crimen perniciosum rei publice quod potest an accuser (who has adequate evidence) to lay out before
probare iudici accusare, ita ad predicatores et doctores the judge a crime fatal to the public weal, so is it the
spectat errores perniciosos contra fidem catholicam business of preachers and doctors to condemn deadly
insurgentes reprobare. Sed sciens papam esse hereticum errors which arise against the catholic faith. But he who
et conantem a fide avertere orthodoxos ipsum, si potest knows that the pope is a heretic attempting to turn true
probare, accusare tenetur. Igitur predicatores et believers away from the faith must accuse this pope if he
doctores scientes papam hereticum laborare fidem has adequate proof. Therefore preachers and doctors who
corrumpere orthodoxam doctrinam suam erroneam know that a heretic pope is exerting himself to corrupt
reprobare tenentur. Maior videtur aperta. Minor the true faith must condemn his false doctrine. The major
probatur auctoritate Gregorii qui, ut legitur 2 q. 7 c. premiss seems obvious. The minor is proved by the
Sicut, ait: "sicut laudabile discretumque est reverentiam authority of Gregory who states (we read this in 2 q. 7 c.
et honorem exhibere prioribus, ita rectitudinis et Dei Sicut): "just as it is worthy of notice and praise to
honoris est, si qua in eis sunt que indigent correctione, demonstrate respect and honour to priors, so is it a matter
nulla dissimulatione postponere, ne totum (quod absit) of right and of God's honour not to delay through
corpus morbus invadat, si languor non fuerit curatus in postponement if there are aspects of their behaviour
capite". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod ad which require correction, lest (God forbid) the disease
rectitudinem Deique timorem spectat accusare should invade the entire body if the head's illness be not
quemcunque prelatum qui totum corpus conatur cured"[col. 499]. We gather from these words that to
inficere. Cum ergo papa hereticus totum corpus accuse any prelate who is attempting to poison an entire
ecclesie heretica pravitate molitur inficere, papa body is a matter of right and fear of God. Therefore since
hereticus est a scientibus et probare valentibus a heretic pope is trying to infect the whole body of the
accusandus.
church with heretical wickedness, those who know this
and are able to prove it must accuse a heretic pope.
Capitulum 47
Chapter 47
Discipulus: Pro assertione predicta ad presens nolo Student: I do not wish at this time to hear further
plures rationes audire, quia satis videtur probabile quod arguments in support of the stated position, since it
predicatores et doctores si simul concordaverint seems probable enough that if preachers and doctors
debeant unanimiter doctrinam pape erroneam were of one mind they would be bound to unanimously
reprobare. Sed nunquid si multitudo predicatorum et condemn the false doctrine of the pope. But if the
doctorum seu magistrorum pape heretico consenserit, multitude of preachers and doctors or masters were to
faverit, vel non restiterit, debent pauci doctrine pape agree with a heretic pope, show him favour, or not resist
erronee obviare.
him, is it really possible that a remaining few would be
obligated to oppose the pope's erroneous doctrine.
Magister: Sunt quidam dicentes quod si pauci Master: There are some who say that if a few preachers
predicatores et doctores in doctrina permanserint and doctors maintained their commitment to orthodox
orthodoxa, et tota alia multitudo pape heretico doctrine, while the entire remaining multitude provided
consensum et favorem prebuerit, illi pauci debent ei consent and favour to a heretic pope, those few would
resistere modis congruis toto posse. Imo si unus solus have the duty to resist him by appropriate means with all
remaneret fixus in fide, deberet intrepide doctrinam their strength. Indeed if but a single doctor remained firm
erroneam pape heretici improbare, exemplo Helie in the faith, he would be obligated to attack fearlessly the
prophete qui, quamvis putasset se solum prophetam false doctrine of a heretic pope, following the example of
fidelem Dei fuisse relictum, a fide vera minime the prophet Elijah, who, although he believed himself to
deviavit, sed hereticos et apostatas quando fuit be the sole remaining faithful prophet of God [1 Kings
opportunitas constantissime confutavit. Et per 18:22], did not swerve from the true faith, but spoke out
consequens multo magis, si aliquis prelatus cum paucis against heretics and apostates with utmost consistency
predicatoribus et doctoribus sibi subiectis pape heretico when he had the opportunity to do so. And consequently
nullatenus consentiret, tota alia multitudine suis if some prelate with a few preachers and doctors subject
erroribus adherente, illi predicatores et doctores pauci to him had in no way given his consent to a heretic pope
una cum prelato suo debent doctrine pape erronee while the entire remaining multitude supported the
contraire. Deberetque prelatus dicere cum Mathatia heretic pope's errors, those few preachers and doctors
illud 1 Mac. 2: "Et si omnes gentes regi Antiocho" (hoc along with their prelate should oppose all the more
est pape heretico) "obedient ut discedat unusquisque a strongly the false doctrine of the pope. And this prelate
servitute patrum suorum et consentiunt mandatis eius, should utter, along with Mathathias, the following words
ego et filii mei et fratres mei obediemus legi patrum of 1 Maccabees 2: "even if all people should obey king
442

