inseruntur. Preter que et determinationes ecclesie in about heretics, on how anyone should be recognised as a
scriptura divina fundatas, fere omnia alia de hereticis in heretic, many things from which are inserted in the
libris eorum inventa non quis sit habendus hereticus sed books of the canonists. Apart from these and the
quomodo sit contra hereticos in iudicio procedendum et determinations of the church based on divine scripture,
qua debeant pena feriri declarant, quod in titulo de almost everything else about heretics found in their
hereticis qui in libro decretalium est insertus patenter books makes clear not who should be considered a
apparet. Predicta autem, quia sunt positiva particularia et heretic but how judicial proceedings should be
ex inventione pendent humana, non sunt de conducted against heretics and with what punishment
consideratione theologorum, qui principaliter talia non they ought to be struck. This is quite clear in the section,
considerant. Per regulas tamen universales ad ipsos De hereticis, which is found in the book of decretals
pertinet iudicare, ubi deficeret prudentia canonistarum, [book 5, title 7]. However, because these things are
an leges ecclesiastice de hereticis certis modis plectendis positive particulars which depend on human invention
et modo procedendi contra eosdem scripturis sint they are not reflected on by theologians, who do not
adverse divinis, quia si leges huiusmodi contrariarent reflect mainly on such things. Nevertheless, where
scripture sacre non essent aliqualiter tollerande.
canonistic jurisprudence is deficient, it pertains to
theologians to judge by universal rules whether the
ecclesiastical laws about punishing heretics in certain
ways and about the way of proceeding against them are
contrary to the divine scriptures, because if such laws
were opposed to sacred scripture they should not in any
way be tolerated.
Explicit liber primus .
The first book ends.
William
of
part 1, book 2, chapters 1-17
Text and translation by John Scott.
Copyright © 1999, The British Academy

Ockham,

Dialogus,

Capitulum 1

Chapter 1

Discipulus Quae recitasti circa quaesita ad praesens
mihi sufficiunt, et ideo ad alia que magis habeo cordi
festino. Volo enim de haeresibus multa inquirere, sed
quia nonnunquam cognitio unius contrariorum ad
cognitionem alterius conferre dignoscitur, quaero
primo quae veritates sunt catholicae censendae.

Student What you have recited about the things I
asked about is enough for me at the moment, and so I
hasten on to other matters that I have more at heart.
For I want to ask many things about heresies; but
because sometimes knowledge of one of [two]
contraries is known to provide knowledge of the
other, I want to know first which truths should be
considered catholic.

WHICH TRUTHS ARE CATHOLIC TRUTHS?
Magister Quaestio tua unum videtur supponere et
aliud quaerere. Videtur enim supponere quod non
22

Master Your question seems to suppose one thing
and to seek to know another. For it seems to suppose

