hereticos in iudicio , ac etiam modum in iudicio suits , the way of proceeding against heretics in court ,
defendendi de heresi accusatos : primum ad theologos, and also the way of defending in court those accused of
secundum ad iuristas noscitur pertinere, quemadmodum heresy. The first is known to pertain to theologians, the
aliud est cognoscere denarios veros a falsis, aurum ab second to lawyers, just as it is one thing to know true
auricalco, equos sanos ab egris, arma fortia et fabrefacta money from forgeries, gold from brass, healthy horses
ab aliis, et aliud est scire si aliquis de aliquo predictorum from sick ones, strong and skilfully made arms from
voluerit in iudicio aliquem accusare, et accusatus se others, and it is another thing to know---if someone
nisus fuerit defensare, quomodo libelli accusationis, wanted to accuse someone in court of any one of the
responsionis, appellationis, et huiusmodi quibus uti in above and the accused strove to defend himself---how
iudicio fuerit oportunum confici debeant et formari: the writs of accusation, reply, appeal, and the like which
primum ad monetarios, aurifabros, fabros ferri et it would be suitable to use in court should be prepared
fabricatores armorum spectare dinoscitur, secundum and composed: the first is known to pertain to moneyers,
vero ad iuristas non est dubium pertinere. Unde per goldsmiths, makers of iron and forgers of arms, but
istam rationem probare contingeret quod ad iuristas there is indeed no doubt that the second pertains to
pertineret discernere quod aurum est verum, quod lawyers. By that argument, therefore, it would be
falsum, qui panni sunt artificialiter facti, qui aliter, que possible to prove that it would pertain to lawyers to
edificia sunt utilia quibuscumque, que inutilia et, ut determine what is true gold and what false, which
concludam breviter, de omnibus mechanicis et rebus garments have been skilfully made and which otherwise,
naturalibus universis que in usum veniunt hominum which buildings are useful to anyone at all and which
haberent principaliter iuriste discernere qualia essent not useful, and, to conclude briefly, lawyers would
secundum naturam suam vel artem, cum de omnibus chiefly have the power to determine, in connection with
huiusmodi contingat in iudicio litigare. In quo casu all the works of mechanical art and all natural objects
necesse est litigatores pro libellis accusationis, that fall to the use of humans, what kind of thing they
responsionis, appellationis et huiusmodi ad iuristas were according to their nature or to art, since it is
habere recursum. Constat autem quod sepe iuriste periti possible to litigate in court about everything of this kind.
de rebus minimis an sint tales quales debeant esse, In such a case it is necessary for those litigating to have
secundum naturam vel artem a qua fiunt, nesciunt recourse to lawyers for writs of accusation, reply,
iudicare; quomodo tamen de talibus rebus recuperandis appeal, and the like. It is certain, however, that learned
vel defendendis in iudicio oporteat formare libellos, et lawyers often do not know how to judge of the smallest
alia que spectant ad formam agendi et defendendi coram things whether they are such as they should be
iudice, non ignorant.
according to their nature or the art by which they are
made. Yet they are not ignorant about how it is
appropriate to prepare writs for recovering or defending
such things in court and about other matters which
pertain to the form of acting and defending before a
judge.
Magister:: Ecce interrogationem tuam primam iuxta Master: So I have briefly investigated your first
formam quam michi prefixisti breviter pertractavi. Nunc question in the form you fixed for me in advance. Now
autem propone aliam, vel quiescere me permittas.
propose another one, or allow me to rest.
Capitulum 7
Chapter 7
Discipulus: QUIA ALIQUI canoniste putant, ut dicis, Student: SOME CANONISTS, as you say, think that it
quod ad ipsos principaliter spectat inter assertionem pertains principally to them to discriminate between a
catholicam et hereticalem discernere, cum tamen michi catholic and an heretical assertion, yet since they would
videantur falcem suam mittere in messem alienam si hoc seem to me to be putting their scythe into someone else's
absque theologia attemptare presumpserint, eo quod nec harvest [cf. Deuteronomy 23:25] if they presumed to
absque theologia capitula in decretis inserta que de attempt this without theology, in that without theology
heresibus eloquuntur intelligere queant, dic michi, they would be unable to understand the chapters inserted
obsecro, parum a principali proposito disgrediendo, quid in the decretals which speak about heresies. Tell me, I
sentiunt literati de intellectu eorum que in decretis pray, departing a little from our original plan, what the
habentur, ad quos videlicet principalius et profundius learned think about the meaning of the materials found
pertinet illorum intellectum cognoscere .
in the decretals---to whom, that is, does it more chiefly
and profoundly pertain to know their meaning?
Who best understands the content of canon law?
Magister:: Circa questionem tuam inveniuntur Master: Opposing opinions are found about your
opiniones contrarie. Canoniste enim sentire videntur question. For canonists seem to think that they not only
quod ipsi non solum habent memoriam maiorem eorum have a greater memory of those things that are inserted
que in libris iuris canonici inseruntur sed etiam illa in the books of canon law but also that they understand
clarius et magis profunde intelligunt , et quis sit them more clearly and deeply, and that it pertains
intellectus ipsorum, ad ipsos spectat principaliter chiefly to them to judge, at least by way of teaching,
11

