summe cavere ne assertiones ipsius ambiguas contra individuals are not easily misled by sophistical reasons
mentem eius, vel etiam preter mentem ipsius ad and misunderstood authorities. You will, by the way, be
perversum nitantur trahere intellectum. Et multo fortius able to discover in Book Nine [?] of The best method of
assertiones eius veras in omni sensu pervertere minime learning [cf. Introduction to 1 Dial. 6. 16-35] by which
debent. Si enim aliquod fecerint predictorum, presertim rational science judgement is most potently assisted in
scienter, vel etiam ex ignorantia crassa et supina, non these contexts. It is those who posses both superior
solum coram Deo peccare mortaliter iudicabuntur, sed memory and superior judgement (some consider this
etiam apud intelligentes maligni vel invidi aut iniusti confluence to occur but rarely), and who are learned in
apparebunt. In primis igitur, mentem ipsius ex omnibus the Sacred Letters, who would be the best qualified
dictis eius, quando assertio eius est ambigua, opponents of the errors of a pope infected by heretical
investigent. Si enim assertio eius non est ambigua sed wickedness. It is also proper that the qualified
sensum habens tantummodo falsum, non est necesse ad opponents of a heretic pope be supremely careful not to
alia dicta eius recurrere. Cum vero patuerit manifeste attempt to forcibly convert his ambiguous assertions
sensum eius esse erroneum, non cavillose, non into interpretations which run counter to his intention,
sophistice, non per auctoritates male intellectas, non per or, equally, to strain these assertions into perverse
assertiones dubias et de quibus est licitum disputare, non meanings which go beyond his intention. And much
per rationes fantasticas, non intelligibiles, et intricatas, more significantly, they must not pervert those
non per dicta illorum quos licitum est negare, sed per assertions of his which are true in every sense. For if
scripturas autenticas bene et sane intellectas, ac per they did any of the aforementioned, especially if they
rationes apertas, evidentes, et irrefragabiles, studeant did this knowingly, or on the basis of grossly passive
reprobare et fundare solidissime contrariam veritatem. ignorance, they will not only be judged as mortal
Hec autem omnia amore faciant veritatis et odio sinners before God, but will also appear to be malicious,
falsitatis, ut ira, rancore, vel odio persone pape heretici or envious, or unjust in the eyes of intelligent observers.
nullatenus moveantur.
Therefore let them initially analyze the heretic pope's
ambiguous assertion on the foundation of all his
statements. But if his assertion is not ambiguous, and
can only have a sense which is false, it is not necessary
to refer to his other statements. If, however, it were clear
and obvious that the papal assertion was erroneous, let
the opponents proceed to reject it and to lay most solid
foundations for the contrary truth: not in quibbling
fashion, not by sophistry, not by misunderstood
authorities, not by doubtful assertions concerning which
debate is permissible, not by fantastic, unintelligible,
and involved allegations, not by the statements of those
thinkers one is permitted to reject, but by authentic
Scriptures, well and solidly understood, and by reasons
which are clear, evident, and irrefutable. And let them
do all this from love of truth and from hatred of
falsehood, so that they be in no way motivated by anger,
resentment, or hatred towards the person of the heretic
pope.
Discipulus: Cum instarem quod hoc opus inciperes, Student: When I urged you to begin this work, I
arbitrabar brevem tractatulum De hereticis nos facturos, thought that we would compose a brief little treatise On
qui preter estimationem meam in longum aliquantulum heretics. The actual product has expanded, beyond my
est protensus, quem si omnes difficultates nunc michi de expectation, into a rather long treatise. If I were to
papa heretico eiusque complicibus occurrentes tibi submit to you for discussion all the problems which now
disserendas exponerem, oporteret extendere in occur to me concerning a heretic pope and his
immensum. Sane cum opera prolixa pluribus accomplices, the treatise would swell into immensity.
dinoscantur ingrata modernis, sit hic presens sermo But since long works are not viewed with favour by
noster De hereticis consummatus. Tue autem many of our contemporaries, let this present discourse
benevolentie gratias ago, quod personam induens of ours On heretics be herewith concluded. I am indeed
recitantis, votis meis, nunc abbreviando, nunc falsas grateful for your kindness. Assuming the persona of a
sententias recitando et pro eis fortiter allegando, nunc ad reciter, you took care to acquiesce to my wishes,
rationes probabiles respondendo, nunc argumentationes sometimes abbreviating the material being discussed,
sophisticas non solvendo, nunc veritates absque sometimes reciting false opinions and arguing firmly in
probationibus referendo, et quantum ad omnia alia, support of them, sometimes responding to strong and
condescendere studuisti. Istum autem modum utilem probable reasons, sometimes leaving sophistical
reputavi, quia sic nec ad probandum nec ad arguments unsolved, sometimes simply declaring truths
490

