Church to a priest, though the arguments do hold concerning those who manifestly and publicly fall into heresy
and error, who have scandalised others, or at least given them occasion to err: they should revoke their errors
purely and without any condition.
[iii] Third, the same point is proved by argument. [a] Errors must be revoked in the same way as sins must be
purged. But according to Pope Calixtus, quoted Extra, De Poenitentiis et remissionibus, c. 1: "Manifest sins are
not to be purged by hidden correction" and are not to be purged conditionally. Therefore manifest and published
errors must not be revoked secretly or conditionally, but purely and simply. Thus, therefore, it is clear that all
heretics and all who make revocation after they learn that they have erred, are bound to revoke their errors purely
and without any condition (or in a hidden way in the presence of God, at least, if their errors are hidden and not
public and they have not published their errors), for they are bound to satisfy those whom they have scandalised,
or given at least occasion to err.
[b] Second, it must be proved that one who errs out of simplicity or ignorance alone, without any pertinacity,
against a Catholic truth that he is not bound to believe explicitly is not bound to revoke any error before he learns
that he has erred, but it is enough to protest that he is ready to revoke if he learns that he has erred. This is
proved as follows. No one is bound to lie. Therefore such a person is not bound to admit that he has erred while
he is not certain that he is in error, and thus he should not revoke an error.
But someone might say that by this argument no unknowing heretic would be bound to revoke his heresy,
because [text faulty?: without lying he cannot say] that he has erred, since he believes that he has never erred. To
this it can be said that by the above argument it is indeed proved that an unknowing heretic, while the
consciousness lasts by which he believes that he holds the truth, should not revoke an error; but he is bound to
lay aside that consciousness and is not bound to hold the heresy. But one who errs against a truth that he is not
bound to believe explicitly is not bound by necessity of salvation to lay aside that consciousness, nor does he sin
mortally in having such a consciousness before he learns that he is in error, and therefore there is no similarity
between the heretic and such a person in error.
The foregoing implies manifestly what sort of revocation the inventor of the aforesaid heresy should make, if he
wishes to be reputed a Catholic: namely one that declares that he is not a heretic on account of the mentioned
heresy (though by no declaration could he declare that he has not been a heretic). For he is bound to revoke the
said heresy purely and without any condition or excuse, in these or equivalent words: "I disown the heresy I have
approved and taught, because I have asserted that the souls of the saints in heaven do not clearly see God; I
consent to the orthodox faith, and with heart and mouth confess that the purged souls of the saints are in heaven
seeing God clearly face-to-face". That he is bound to make such a revocation is shown from what has gone
before. For it has been shown that all those who err against a Catholic truth that they are bound to believe
explicitly are bound to revoke their error purely and unconditionally. But this man errs against a Catholic truth
that he is bound to believe explicitly. Therefore he is bound to revoke the said heresy purely and unconditionally.
And therefore when he says, "However, it was never our intention to say anything against the faith", he is not at
all excused by these words, just as Greeks, Jacobites, Georgians, Arians, Sabellians, Donatists and very many
other heretics are not at all excused, though it was not their intention to say anything against the faith. For though
this excuse means that he was not a knowing heretic, he cannot be excused so that he was not at least an
unknowing heretic.
And he should be convicted in two ways. First, because he does not believe a truth that he is bound to believe
explicitly. Second, because supposing that he denies a truth he is bound to believe explicitly, and therefore given
this, though through his words [probationes: orationes?] alone he cannot be convicted, nevertheless he is
convicted by his actions, since they show manifest pertinacity and show that he does not seek the truth with
careful solicitude and is not ready to be corrected. And when he says that "if we have said anything", etc, "we
revoke [it] from [nunc or tunc?] now", though here he uses the word "revoke", nevertheless this is not a
revocation properly speaking but rather a protestation.
And therefore two points must be proved here. First, that here he does not put forward a revocation in the proper
sense; second, that this protestation does not benefit him.
[i] That there is no revocation here is clear, because a conditional statement asserts nothing, but this is
conditional, therefore it is not the revocation of any error. Second, because a revocation is a confession of error;
but someone who says something conditionally confesses nothing; therefore etc. Third, because a Catholic who
has never erred should revoke no error; the above words, however, can and should be said by every Catholic;
therefore this is no revocation. Fourth, every unknowing heretic, who would adhere to his error pertinaciously,
thinking that it is Catholic truth, would say such words also; and nevertheless such a person by such words
intends to revoke no error; therefore such words do not contain a revocation.
[ii] Second, it is proved that the said protestation does not benefit him at all.
First, because a protestation is of no benefit when someone does the opposite, Extra, De sensibus, c. Olim, and
De constitutionibus, Tantum; but this man does many things opposed to the above protestation, for by many
deeds and works he shows that he is by no means ready to make a revocation, as has been shown above;
therefore such a protestation in no way benefits such a person.
536

