not always necessary to appeal in the case of the latter.
And by reference to this the reply to the fifth reason is
evident.
Capitulum 30
Chapter 30
Discipulus: Iste responsiones valde debiles michi Student: These replies appear quite weak to me, but I do
videntur, quas tamen pro nunc nolo amplius pertractari. not want to have them discussed further at this time.
Ideo dic quomodo ad rationes in contrarium Therefore state how one responds to the reasons for the
respondetur.
contrary position.
Magister: Ad primam respondetur quod quando Master: The answer to the first is that when a sentence
sententia transit in rem iudicatam, nisi fuerit becomes legally conclusive (unless it is suspended by an
appellatione suspensa, tunc qui a sententia iniqua infra appeal), then the person who, without reasonable cause,
tempus statutum a iure absque causa rationabili neglected to appeal from an unjust judgement within the
neglexerit appellare, per interpretationem iuris late time frame specified by the law appears, in the eyes of
sententie parere videtur. Sed quando sententia iniqua the law, to be obeying the rendered sentence. But when
nullo modo potest transire in rem iudicatam, nec aliquo the iniquitous sentence can in no way become legally
modo potest firmitatem sententie obtinere, ille qui a tali conclusive nor acquire by any means the firmness of an
sententia non appellat
non intelligitur per established decision, the person who does not appeal
interpretationem iuris parere eidem. Talis autem est from such a judgement is not understood by legal
sententia pape lata contra fidem, quia nullo modo potest interpretation to be obeying the sentence. And this is the
transire in rem iudicatam, nec unquam potest aliquis per judgement of the pope rendered against the faith,
talem sententiam obligari. Ideo non est necesse because it can in no way become legally conclusive nor
appellare, sed sufficit absque verbo appellandi verbo vel can anyone ever become obligated by such. Therefore it
facto pro loco et tempore sententiam detestari, et eo ipso is not necessary to overtly appeal, and sufficient to abhor
intelligitur quis eidem sententie dissentire, et talis the judgement by word or deed as time and place
dissensus loco appellationis est habendus. Ad secundam require, without uttering the appeal formula. By this very
respondetur quod remedium appellationis est ad fact someone is understood to be disagreeing with the
presidium innocentie institutum quando aliter quam per sentence, and such a disagreement is to be accepted as
appellationem non potest innocentia esse tuta. Sed the equivalent of an appeal. The answer to the second
quando innocentia potest aliter esse secura quam per reason is that the remedy of an appeal is instituted for the
remedium appellationis non est simpliciter necessaria protection of innocence, when innocence cannot be
appellatio, licet nonnunquam possit esse utilis etiam secured by any other method save that of an appeal. But
licet innocentia aliter possit esse tuta. Nunc autem de when innocence can be made safe by a method other
iure innocentia catholici contra quem papa pronuntiaret than the remedy of an appeal, then an appeal is plainly
legem christianam esse falsam aliter quam per unnecessary, although it may sometimes be useful even
appellationis remedium potest esse tuta, quia de iure if innocence can be secured in some other manner. At
talis sententia ipsum nequit aliquo modo ligare, et ideo this time, however, the law provides for the innocence of
de iure sufficit catholico absque verbo appellandi talem a catholic against whom the pope were to proclaim that
sententiam verbo vel facto impugnare et ei nullatenus the Christian law is false to be protected otherwise than
obedire.
by the remedy of an appeal, since legally such a sentence
cannot bind this catholic in any way. Therefore it is
legally sufficient for a catholic not to obey such a
sentence and to oppose it by word or deed without a
formal appeal.
Discipulus: Quid si de facto catholicus non est tutus nisi Student: What if in fact a catholic is not safe unless he
appellet a tali sententia pape.
appeals from such a papal sentence.
Magister: In hoc casu tenetur propter defensionem fidei Master: In that case he is bound to appeal in order to
et sue innocentie appellare. Si enim taliter dampnatum a defend the faith and his own innocence. For if other
papa alii christiani nollent defendere nisi vocem Christians would not want to defend someone
appellationis emitteret, necesse esset quod appellaret: condemned in this manner by the pope unless he
non quod de iure teneatur, sed quia aliter de facto tutus formally appealed, it would be necessary for him to
esse non potest. Ad tertiam respondetur quod si quis appeal, not because it was a legal obligation, but because
debet uti aliquo, utendum est eo ad illum usum ad quem otherwise he would in effect be unable to secure his
institutum est. Non tamen omni tempore nec in omni situation. The answer to the third reason is this. If
casu utendum est quolibet ad illum usum ad quem someone must make use of something, he must indeed
institutum est. Medicina enim instituta est ad sanitatem use it for its intended purpose. But one need not use
consequendam et ideo qui debet uti medicina debet uti something for its intended purpose in every case and at
ipsa ad sanitatem consequendam. Non tamen debet quis all times. Medicine, for instance, has been instituted for
omni tempore uti medicina intentione sanitatis the purpose of achieving health, and therefore he who
consequende, quia hoc sepe esset impedimentum must make use of it must have this purpose in mind. Yet
321

