they would not have been heretics.
De sexto genere, scilicet de condemnatis de haeretica
pravitate absque distinctione, dicunt quod sunt
haeretici manifesti si rite et iuste fuerint condemnati,
quia nullus est sententialiter condemnandus de
haeretica pravitate nisi inveniatur pravitas non solum in
errore sed etiam in errante. Ista autem pravitas in
errante est pertinacia. Et ideo soli pertinaces sunt de
pravitate haeretica condemnandi.

About the sixth kind, that is those condemned without
distinction for heretical wickedness, they say that they
are manifest heretics if they have been rightly and
justly condemned because no one should be
condemned by formal sentence for heretical
wickedness unless the wickedness is found not only in
the error but also in the one erring. That wickedness in
the one erring, however, is pertinacity. And therefore
only the pertinacious should be condemned for
heretical wickedness.

Discipulus Ista probabilia mihi videntur, sed miror
quare Innocentius praedicto modo non distinxit.

Student The above seem probable to me, but I
wonder why Innocent did not make the above
mentioned distinction.

Magister Respondetur quod ideo causa brevitas hic
non distinxit, quia quod taliter oportet distinguere ex
aliis sacris canonibus evidenter apparet.

Master The reply is that it was for the sake of brevity
that he did not make a distinction at this point,
because it is perfectly clear from other sacred canons
that it is appropriate to make a distinction in the above
way.

Capitulum 10

Chapter 10

Discipulus Quamvis ex praedictis colligi possit
quomodo ad plures auctoritates quas adduxi isti modo
saepe fato describentes haereticum respondent, volo
tamen ut discurras per singulas.

Student Although we can gather from the above how
those describing heresy in the oft-mentioned way
reply to many texts that I brought forward [in ch.5],
nevertheless I want you to run through them
separately.

Magister Ad auctoritatem Nicolai papae recitantis
verba Celestini respondent quod illa verba intelligenda
sunt de publice praedicantibus scienter contra
determinata a concilio generali et etiam de publice
praedicantibus errores ipsos, eosdem errores temere
asserendo, vel protestando se nunquam revocaturos
eosdem, vel pertinaces quomodolibet se monstrando.

Master To the text from Pope Nicholas quoting the
words of Celestine they reply that those words should
be understood of those preaching publicly and
knowingly against determinations made by a general
council and also of those publicly preaching those
errors, rashly affirming the same errors, or protesting
that they will never revoke them, or showing
themselves pertinacious in any way at all.

Auctoritas autem Hieronimi in oppositum allegatur
quia idem Hieronimus in verbis adductis insinuare
videtur quod reprobans confessionem ab apostolico
approbatam non est ex hoc ipso haereticus reputandus
quia poterit esse imperitus. Et ita si ex sola imperitia
dixerit contra veritatem non est inter haereticos
computandus.

Jerome's text, however, is brought forward for the
opposite conclusion because in the words adduced he
seems to imply that someone rejecting the confession
approved by the Apostolic [i.e. the pope] should not
be regarded as a heretic because of that fact since he
could be unskilled. And so if he speaks against the
truth from lack of skill alone he should not be counted
among the heretics.

Gelasius etiam, ut dicunt, intelligit de eo qui scienter
labitur in haeresim condemnatam. Talis enim est
haereticus iudicandus. Et cum dicitur, "Gelasius inter
labentem in haeresim pertinaciter et non pertinaciter
non distinguit, ergo nec nos debemus distinguere", isti
respondent quod ubi papa vel canon non distinguit nec
aliqua distinctio neque ex aliis canonibus neque ex

Gelasius too, they say, means someone who
knowingly falls into a condemned heresy. For such a
person should be adjudged a heretic. And when it is
said, "Gelasius did not distinguish between falling
into heresy pertinaciously and not pertinaciously, and
so we should not distinguish either", they reply that
when a pope or a canon does not distinguish and no

101

