Quod enim primum sit falsum ostenditur, quia contra That indeed the first one is false is shown in this manner.
papam hereticum tam a principe principum, scilicet a Against a heretic pope war has already been declared,
Domino nostro Iesu Christo, quam ab apostolis vicariis both by the ruler of rulers, namely by our Lord Jesus
eius iam est bellum indictum. Quod enim Christus Christ, and by his vicars the apostles. Indeed that Christ
bellare spiritualiter contra papam si fiat hereticus aperte has clearly commanded spiritual war against a pope if the
mandaverit, apparet per illud Mat. 10 cum dicit: "non latter becomes a heretic appears from the following text
veni pacem mittere sed gladium". Per 'gladium' potestas of Matthew 10[: 34] where Christ states: "I came not to
bellandi datur intelligi. Christus igitur omnes catholicos send peace but a sword". By 'sword' is meant the power
in bello spirituali constituit. Precipuum autem bellum to wage war. Therefore Christ granted the right to wage
catholicorum contra hereticos esse videtur. Nullus spiritual war to all Catholics. But the paramount war of
autem hereticus perniciosior vel periculosior est papa Catholics seems to be against heretics, and no heretic is
heretico. Ergo contra papam hereticum precipue est deadlier or more dangerous than a heretic pope, therefore
bellandum spiritualiter, nec expectandum est edictum spiritual war is to be waged above all against a heretic
principis, quia iam edictum a Christo principe est pope, nor must one await the ruler's command, since the
egressum. Hoc etiam edictum auctoritate Christi beatus command has already been issued by the ruler, Christ.
Paulus scribens ad Ephesios promulgavit. Ait enim cap. And blessed Paul promulgated this command by Christ's
6: "accipite armaturam Dei ut possitis resistere in die authority, writing to the Ephesians, for he states in
malo", et post: "calciati pedes in preparatione evangelii chapter 6: "take unto you the whole armour of God, that
pacis, in omnibus sumentes scutum fidei in quo possitis ye may be able to withstand in the evil day"[Ephesians
omnia tela nequissimi ignea extinguere, et galeam 6:13], and afterwards: "your feet shod with the
salutis assumite, et gladium spiritus quod est verbum preparation of the gospel of peace; above all, taking the
Dei". Quod edictum licet omnibus quantum ad aliqua shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
dirigatur, tamen quantum ad quedam specialiter the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of
predicatores et doctores videtur respicere. Dies enim salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word
mala, imo pessima erit, si unquam papa potens regum of God". [Ephesians 6:15-17] Although this command is
et principum favore munitus in hereticam incidet addressed to all persons with respect to some matters, it
pravitatem. Putant enim nonnulli probabile quod tunc appears nevertheless to specifically reference preachers
erit tribulatio catholicorum qualis non fuit ab initio and doctors as to particular activities. For it will be an
christianitatis usque modo, et tamen forte strages evil day, indeed the worst of days, should a powerful
corporalis christianorum pro fide nulla vel parvissima pope favoured by kings and princes ever lapse into
erit. Multitudo enim christianorum, licet pro heretical wickedness. And many think it probable that at
temporalibus forsitan tempore pape heretici sit prelia that time there would be such a threshing of Catholics as
innumera perpessura, pro fide tamen persecutionem was not ever experienced since the beginning of
nullam penitus sustinebit, quia absque coactione et Christianity, and yet the physical destruction of
violentia, voluntate spontanea, pape heretico adherebit, Christians for their faith would perhaps be nonexistent or
et forte paucissimi eidem resistere conabuntur, et tamen insignificant. For although the multitude of Christians
omnes monet Apostolus armaturam Dei accipere ut in would perhaps undergo countless conflicts for the sake of
die mala pape heretico possint resistere. Predicatores worldly goods at the time of a heretic pope, it would
autem et doctores specialiter exhortatur ut ad nevertheless suffer no persecution whatsoever for the
resistendum se preparent cum dicit: "calciati pedes in faith, because the multitude would support the heretic
preparationem evangelii pacis," ubi dicit glossa: "id est pope willfully, spontaneously, and without being
ut sitis parati ad predicandum evangelium," et quomodo pressured or coerced, with perhaps very few people
se debeant preparare declarat cum asserit: attempting to resist him, despite the fact that the Apostle
"assumendum gladium spiritus quod est verbum Dei". warns everyone to take the armour of God so that in the
Hoc enim ad predicatores et magistros specialiter evil day they might be able to resist a heretic pope. On
spectare dinoscitur, quorum est per verbum Dei the other hand, Paul specifically admonishes preachers
tanquam per gladium acutissimum omnes hereticos et and doctors to prepare themselves for resistance when he
specialiter papam hereticum iugulare, et ita edictum de states: "your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel
bello gerendo contra papam hereticum quod a Christo of peace" [Ephesians 6:15] (here the gloss says: "i.e. that
exierat cum dixit "non veni pacem mittere sed gladium" you may be ready to preach the gospel"[Glossa
hic Paulus publice promulgavit cum gladium spiritus ordinaria to the Bible], and Paul declares how they ought
quod est verbum Dei ad expugnandum hereticos to prepare when he states: "take the sword of the Spirit
asseruit assumendum. Unde et glossa ibi dicit: "de hoc which is the word of God"[Ephesians 6:17]. This is
gladio Dominus ait 'non veni pacem mittere sed known as particularly relevant to preachers and masters.
gladium'". De eodem ergo gladio loquuntur discipulus It is their task to destroy all heretics, and especially a
et magister, quare sequitur quod edictum de bello heretic pope, by the word of God wielded as the sharpest
gerendo contra hereticos et specialiter contra papam of swords. And thus the command to wage war against a
hereticum a Christo principe iam exivit.
heretic pope which had issued from Christ when he said
" I came not to send peace but a sword", Paul publicly
430

