superari et in anima cruciari periculosius est et peius the other more effective. Therefore the pope, if he were
quam morti succumbere corporali. Ergo gravius to become a heretic, would spiritually triumph over the
periculum imminebit vel poterit imminere populo Christian people more swiftly than the Saracens, or it is
christiano si papa efficietur hereticus quam si sarraceni arguable that he would. But it is more dangerous, indeed
totam terram christianorum sue subderent ditioni.
worse, to be defeated spiritually, and to have one's soul
crucified, than to succumb to physical death. Therefore
a more serious danger will threaten, or might threaten,
the Christian people if the pope should become a heretic
than if the Saracens were to subject the whole land of
the Christians to their rule.
Discipulus: Qui sunt illi modi quibus papa, si esset Student: What would be the methods by means of
hereticus, catholicos et christianos populos impugnaret. which the pope, if he were a heretic, would attack the
catholic and Christian peoples.
Magister: Respondetur quod catholicos et sibi Master: The answer is that he would perhaps provide
resistentes forte non minus acerbe quam sarraceni for a physical assault on catholics and on those resisting
corporaliter procuraret invadi. Quia mandaret episcopis him no less cruel than that of the Saracens. For he
et inquisitoribus heretice pravitatis ut eos ubicunque would issue a command to bishops and to inquisitors of
possent satagerent captivare, et nisi a suo proposito heretical wickedness, that they strive to capture such
resilirent, eos traderent curie seculari, qui, ut pape opponents wherever possible, and hand them over to the
heretico complacerent et ab eo aliquod beneficium secular arm unless they recanted their conviction; and
obtinerent, tanquam belue crudelissime mandatum pape these papal agents, in order to please the heretic pope
heretici totis viribus conarentur effectui mancipare. and to obtain some benefice from him, would, like the
Secundo, papa, si esset hereticus, per scripturarum most cruel of beasts, attempt to effectively carry out the
testimonia ad suum sensum intorta christianos invaderet heretic pope's mandate with all the powers at their
et multos ad suam traheret voluntatem, eo quod disposal. Secondly, the pope, if he were a heretic, would
intelligentiam scripturarum nequaquam habentes ad attack Christians with Scriptural citations twisted in
verum intellectum pervenire nescirent. Tertio, support of his interpretation, and would win over many
impugnaret christianos per speciem veritatis et to his will, in that, not having a proper understanding of
religionis, cui non adherere videretur multis stultum et the Scriptures, they would not know how to grasp their
insanum.
Quarto,
impugnaret
catholicos
per true meaning. Thirdly, he would attack Christians by an
ecclesiasticam auctoritatem, cui non obedire putaretur a illusion of truthfulness and religious devotion, not to
nonnullis inobedientie crimen incurrere.
support which would seem to many a mark of
foolishness or madness. Fourthly, he would attack
catholics by relying on ecclesiastical authority, not to
obey which would be thought by some to be a
commission of the crime of disobedience.
Discipulus: Probabile michi videtur quod istis modis et Student: It seems probable to me that the pope, if he
aliis papa, si esset hereticus, niteretur christianos suis were a heretic, would attempt to subjugate Christians to
erroribus subiugare et eos spiritualiter iugulare. Sed his errors by these and by other methods, and to destroy
christiani sibi nequaquam acquiescerent, imo nec etiam them spiritually. But Christians would in no way yield
tolerarent, sed statim de eo facerent iustitie to him, indeed they would hardly tolerate him, but
complementum. Quare cum ipse esset unus cui omnes would immediately subject him to the final process of
resisterent christiani, sarraceni autem quamplurimi, justice. Therefore, since the heretic pope would be but a
nullo modo tantum posset imminere periculum si papa single individual whom all Christians would resist,
efficeretur hereticus sicut si sarraceni sibi terram while the Saracens would be quite numerous, in no
christianorum subiicerent.
manner would it be possible for a similar peril to arise if
the pope became a heretic, as would be the case if the
Saracens conquered the land of the Christians.
Magister: Respondetur quod si christiani vellent pape Master: The answer is that if Christians wanted to stand
heretico obviare, non incumberet eis tantum periculum up to a heretic pope, they would not be faced with as
spirituale sicut si sarraceni regiones christianorum sibi great a spiritual danger as they would have to deal with
subiicerent. Sed dubitant isti quod multitudo if the Saracens were to conquer the Christian territories.
christianorum pape heretico nullatenus obviaret, imo But these thinkers consider it arguable that the multitude
suis erroribus adhereret, ipsique sponte faveret.
of Christians would not in fact stand up to a heretic
pope, indeed that it would rather participate in his
errors, and voluntarily support him.
Discipulus: Unde posset accidere quod multitudo Student: How might it come to pass that the multitude
christianorum pape heretico adhereret.
of Christians would join the cause of a heretic pope.
Magister: Dicunt quod ex multis causis forte accideret, Master: They say that this would perhaps happen for a
479

