tempore apostolorum licuit ecclesie dominos infideles and property of temporal goods, nor was it permitted to
rebus temporalibus spoliare.
the church in the age of the apostles to strip nonbelieving lords of their temporal possessions.
Discipulus: Quomodo evacuant aliqui omnem Student: In what way do some of the learned eliminate
proprietatem et dominium laicorum.
every property and lordship of laymen.
Magister: Respondetur quod sunt quidam dicentes quod Master: The answer is that there are some who say that
omne illud spectat ad plenitudinem potestatis ecclesie everything which does not contradict divine law or
quod non obviat legi divini neque legi nature, et in natural law pertains to the plenitude of power of the
omnibus casibus omnes christiani summo pontifici church, and in all such cases all Christians are obligated
obedire tenentur. Quare cum non habere dominium et to obey the supreme pontiff. Therefore since to lack
proprietatem temporalium neque legi divine neque legi lordship and property of temporals contradicts neither
nature repugnet, in hoc tenentur omnes laici summo divine law nor the law of nature, all laymen are bound
pontifici obedire. Quare summus pontifex potest ad to obey the supreme pontiff in this. Therefore the
libitum de temporalibus laicorum disponere, et per supreme pontiff may dispose arbitrarily of the temporals
consequens non sunt censendi ad laicorum proprietatem of laymen, and consequently these temporals are not
et dominium pertinere.
reckoned as pertinent to the property and lordship of
laymen.
Discipulus: De hac materia te exquisite interrogabo in Student: I shall question you abundantly on this issue in
tractatu De dogmatibus Iohannis 22i, quare nunc the treatise On the doctrines of John XXII, therefore at
tantummodo dic cur, non obstante plenitudine potestatis present explain only why the church, notwithstanding
ecclesie, ecclesia non potest obligare christianos ut the plenitude of ecclesiastical power, cannot obligate
etiam pro morte vitanda non communicent corporaliter Christians to refrain from physically communicating
excommunicatis.
with excommunicated persons even in order to avoid
death.
Magister: Respondetur breviter a nonnullis quod hoc ad Master: Some briefly respond that this is not relevant to
plenitudinem potestatis ecclesie minime spectat, quia the church's plenitude of power, because just as the
sicut plenitudo potestatis ecclesie ad res laicorum, ut church's plenitude of power does not extend itself to the
libere faciat de eis quicquid sibi placuerit, minime se properties of laymen, so that it might freely and
extendit, ita etiam plenitudo potestatis ecclesie ad illa arbitrarily dispose of such, neither does the church's
que supererogationis et gravia sunt nullatenus se plenitude of power extend itself to onerous and
extendit, ut, scilicet, illa valeat imperare, licet suadere supererogatory matters, namely, so that it might
possit.
command their performance, although it may counsel
this.
Discipulus: Hoc quod plenitudo potestatis ecclesie ad Student: The claim that the church's plenitude of power
gravia se minime extendit Capitulum Karoli quod does not extend itself to onerous matters appears to
ponitur dis. 19 cap. In memoriam adversari videtur. Ibi negate the Capitulary of Charles [Charlemagne] which
enim sic legitur: "licet vix ferendum ab illa sancta sede is found in dis. 19 c. In memoriam. For in that context
imponatur iugum, tamen feramus et pia devotione we read as follows: "even if a hardly bearable yoke is
toleremus". Quibus verbis manifeste asseritur quod ad imposed by this holy see, we shall nevertheless bear it,
gravia potestas summi pontificis se extendit, cum 'vix and tolerate it with pious devotion". [cols. 60-61] These
ferenda' sint inter gravia computanda.
words clearly assert that the power of the supreme
pontiff extends itself to onerous matters, since matters
"hardly bearable" must be numbered among such.
Magister: Respondetur quod Karolus loquitur de hiis Master: The answer is that Charles is speaking of such
que spectant ad officium summi pontificis. De aliis matters as pertain to the office of the supreme pontiff,
autem nequaquam intelligit. Unde si papa preciperet regi and does not understand this comment as relevant to
vel comiti quod daret nepoti suo aliquam civitatem vel other matters. Hence, were the pope to order a king or a
castrum, imo duos florenos, sibi nullatenus obedire esset count to grant the pope's nephew a certain city or
astrictus. Multo fortius si tale quid preciperet pauperi, fortress, nay, even two florins, the king or the count
non teneretur sibi parere.
would in no way be obligated to obey him. All the more
if the pope were to command something similar to a
poor person would the latter not be bound to obey him.
Discipulus: Dic quomodo respondetur ad secundam Student: Explain how one responds to the second
difficultatem quam tetigi supra.
difficulty I raised earlier.
Magister: Ad illam respondetur per predicta, quia ubi Master: The answer flows from the points just made.
aliquid a lege divina vel iure naturali noscitur esse For where something is known to be forbidden by
prohibitum, ibi potest ecclesia gravissimam penam divine law or by natural law, there the church is
transgredientibus infligere, et ad servandum preceptum empowered to inflict the heaviest of penalties on
470

