hereticorum consortium, misereri aliquis voluerit". Ex the same be decreed by secular princes and authorities.
quibus verbis colligitur quod, ut dicit glossa super verbo Should these authorities happen to be negligent in the
'misereri', hereticis ad cor revertentibus et matter, we desire and command that they be compelled
satisfacientibus sive infra annum sive post annum: "de by ecclesiastical censure, without provision for an
sola ergo misericordia restituantur bona". Defensoribus appeal, to carry these provisions through. Nor should
autem non sunt infra annum bona auferenda. Ergo their properties revert to heretics in the future, unless
defensores de quibus fit mentio in constitutione predicta someone voluntarily takes pity upon them when they
Excommunicamus non sunt heretici nec fautores heretice experience a change of heart and reject the company of
pravitatis reputandi, sed defensores hereticorum heretics". [col. 783] We gather from these words that, as
tantummodo sunt censendi. Qui, sicut habetur Extra, De states the gloss on the word "misereri": "it is therefore
hereticis, Sicut ait, et cap. Si adversus, et Extra, De solely from compassion that properties are returned"
sententia excommunicationis, cap. Noverit, ab hereticis [col. 1675] to heretics who experience a change of heart,
distinguuntur.
and give appropriate satisfaction either within a year or
subsequently. In contrast, defenders are not to lose their
properties within that first year. Therefore the defenders
who are mentioned in the aforesaid constitution
Excommunicamus are neither to be reputed heretics nor
abettors of heretical wickedness, but are only to be
labeled defenders of heretical wickedness. And these are
distinguished from heretics, as we discover in Extra, De
hereticis, Sicut ait, [col. 779] and in c. Si adversus, [col.
784] and in Extra, De sententia excomunicationis, c.
Noverit. [col. 910]
Secunda vero pars antecedentis rationis predicte, scilicet We now prove the second part of the aforestated
quod quandoque defensores 'heretici' appellantur, reason's premisses, namely, that sometimes defenders
probatur. Nam sicut allegatum est supra (24 q. 3 Qui are called heretics. For as was argued above (with
aliorum), defensores errorum alienorum probantur esse reference to 24 q. 3 c. Qui aliorum), those who defend
non solum heretici sed heresiarche, quia in hoc quod the errors of others are proved to be not only heretics,
defendunt aliorum errores sunt magistri errorum. Item, but heresiarchs, because the fact that they defend the
quod aliqui defensores sint heretici reputandi testatur errors of others makes them masters of errors. Again:
Innocentius (Extra, De verborum significatione, cap. Innocent attests that some defenders are to be reputed
Super quibusdam), dicens: "tua devotio postulavit a heretics when he states in Extra, De verborum
nobis qui sint dicendi heretici manifesti. Super quo significatione, c. Super quibusdam : "your faithfulness
diximus tibi respondendum, illos in hoc casu requested us to explain which persons must be called
intelligendos esse manifestos hereticos, qui contra fidem manifest heretics. On this we must offer the following
catholicam publice predicant, aut profitentur, seu reply to you. They should be understood to be manifest
defendunt errorem". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi heretics in your context, who publicly preach against the
quod defensores errorum sunt inter hereticos catholic faith, or who profess or defend error". [col.
computandi. Quod secundum quosdam intelligendum est 923] We understand from these words that defenders of
sive facto sive verbo sive scripto defendant errores, errors are to be numbered among the heretics.
quod secundum eos iuxta modum preexpositum continet According to some, this must be understood to be the
veritatem.
case regardless of whether they defend errors by deed,
verbally, or in writing, and these interpreters claim that
the proposition is true within the explained context.
Capitulum 67
Chapter 67
Discipulus: De defensoribus hereticorum et heretice Student: I do not wish to inquire any further about
pravitatis usque ad tractatum De dogmatibus Iohannis defenders of heretics and of heretical wickedness until
22-i et tractatum De gestis circa fidem altercantium the treatise On the doctrines of John XXII, and the
orthodoxam, nolo plura inquirere. Ideo ad receptatores treatise On the deeds of those disputing about orthodox
pertranseo, de quibus dic in primis quomodo a faith. Therefore I now move on to the issue of receivers
credentibus, fautoribus, et defensoribus distinguuntur. of heretics, concerning which do explain initially how
they are distinguished from believers, abettors, and
defenders.
Magister: Respondetur quod receptator et credens Master: The answer is that a receiver of heretics and a
hereticis duo disparata videntur, quia licet receptator believer of heretics appear to be two different things.
possit esse credens, tamen potest etiam contingere quod For although a receiver might be a believer, it may
non sit credens, quia qui scienter est receptator nevertheless happen that a receiver is not a believer.
hereticorum non est credens, quia non credit eos esse One who is a knowing receiver of heretics is not a
catholicos quos reputat hereticos, nec credit erroribus believer, since he does not believe that those whom he
463

