because then Christ's soul could not have desired the resumption or assumption of a glorious body. To this it
must be said that he himself grants the unsuitability implied, because elsewhere he says in these words: "The
abovementioned face-to-face vision is not consistent with a desire for any other thing". These words must most
clearly be regarded as heretical, because they contradict the Gospel, since Christ, who saw the divine essence,
says (Luke 22[:15]), "With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you". From these words it is clearly
inferred that face-to-face vision is consistent with a desire for some other thing.
The second ambiguous and disputable point contained in the above words is that clear vision is the highest
exaltation of souls. For this can have multiple meanings, one of which is this: among all the exaltations of souls
that are distinct in species, clear vision is the highest. Concerning this there are among the moderns various
opinions. Some say that the clear vision of God is the highest perfection of the soul because it is more perfect
than enjoyment of the divine. Others say that it is highest for the reason that it is the enjoyment of God: for they
do not maintain that the vision of God, and the enjoyment or love of the fatherland [heaven] are really distinct.
Others assert that the clear vision of God is not highest, but the enjoyment or love of the fatherland is higher and
more perfect than vision, and for that reason they deny that clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls, saying
that enjoyment or love of God is higher.
Another interpretation of the above words is this. Clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls in this way, that
souls seeing God clearly cannot be exalted to any perfection distinct in species greater than that which they have.
And this sense is true, whether vision or enjoyment is more perfect, because souls never will have in themselves
formally any perfection distinct in species from the vision of God that is more perfect than vision and love or
enjoyment of God.
A third sense is this. Clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls in this way, that a soul seeing God can be in
no way be exalted to a higher degree of vision of the divine, nor to anything else that is more perfect, or more
imperfect, than vision of God. And this is the opinion of this protestor or revoker, because otherwise the words
above can in no way imply the intended conclusion. But this sense is erroneous, as is clearly apparent from the
above. For from these words it follows evidently that Christ's soul did not see God before the resurrection or
before the death of Christ, because it could become sad, but afterwards it was exalted to a state of complete
impassibility. For the above interpretation clearly conflicts with the master of the sentences, who says (book 2,
dist. 11 [PL 192, col. 675]) that the angels who see God make progress in knowledge and in happiness. He uses
these words: "However, what others say (above) seems more probable, that until the judgment angels can make
progress in knowledge and in other respects". And thus a soul that sees God can be exalted in another respect.
And this should not be denied, since every exaltation is from something less in species to something greater in
species. Since also in human exaltations we often see certain people to be exalted, with higher dignities retained,
to lesser dignities compatible with the higher dignities: thus sometimes a cardinal will be exalted afterwards to
the office of supreme penitentiary while retaining his cardinalate: thus the souls of the saints who see God,
keeping the vision of God, can be exalted to something else that is less than the divine vision, and also to a
clearer vision of God.
With these matters noted, it is easy to answer his argument. For when, first, he says "They cannot be exalted
beyond the clear vision of the divine essence", it is clear from the foregoing that, in the sense he has of it and
from which the conclusion he intends follows, it is erroneous, because beyond clear vision (not the clearest) of
the divine essence is a clearer vision, to which souls can be exalted, just as beyond a whiteness that is not most
intense there is a more intense whiteness, and beyond a charity that is not most perfect there is a more perfect
charity.
When, second, he says, "beyond the highest there is nothing higher", it must be said that this also can have
multiple senses. For something is called "highest" in several ways. For [i] something is simply highest, and in
this sense only God is simply highest, and therefore nothing is higher. And [ii] something is called highest
according to its species, as among all species of colour whiteness can be called the highest, and among all kinds
of visions intellectual vision is called highest. In another way [iii] something can be called highest by a kind of
aggregation, namely that it comprehends all possibilities relevant to its perfection; in this way the blessedness
that is "a state perfect by the aggregation of all goods" [Boethius] can be called the highest. In another way [iv]
something is called highest in one species, and in this way the most intense whiteness can be called the highest,
and the vision of Christ's soul is the highest among all created loves; thus also among kings one can be called
highest and greatest.
So taking "highest" in the first way, in that sense nothing is higher than the highest.
Taking "highest" in the second way, in that sense nothing distinct in species is higher than the highest---in the
genus of the virtues no virtue distinct from charity is higher than charity; however one charity is higher than
another. Thus in the genus of cognitions of God no cognition distinct from the clear vision of God is higher than
the clear vision of God; however, one clear vision of the divine essence is higher than another, for the vision by
which Christ's soul sees God is clearer than the vision by which an angel sees God. And thus, although the clear
vision of God is the highest among the cognitions by which God is known, it is nevertheless not unsuitable that
519

