appended here.
Magister: Bene dicis quod predicta conclusio tenet Master: Your statement that the conclusion we are
plures partes, quia tres continet explicite vel implicite. discussing contains a number of parts is well put, since it
Quarum prima est quod qui non est deceptus de involves three such, explicitly or implicitly. The first
fidelitate pape, quia videlicet non habet probabilem thereof is that one who is not deceived as to the pope's
causam credendi papam esse hereticum, non debet ab eo fidelity (namely because he has no probable cause to
directe pro causa heresis appellare sibi videlicet heresim believe that the pope is a heretic) must not appeal from
imponendo vel ipsum de heresi accusando aut him directly for cause of heresy, namely by imputing a
quomodolibet diffamando. Secunda pars est quod in heresy to him, or by accusing him of heresy, or
casu liceret non decepto de fidelitate pape indirecte slandering him in any way. The second part is that
contra ipsum pro causa heresis appellare, puta si sciret occasionally it would be permitted to someone not
papam de heresi mendaciter diffamatum nolle se deceived as to the pope's fidelity to appeal against him
purgare vel iudicio submittendo vel alio modo debito indirectly for cause of heresy, for instance if he knew
scandalum exortum de ipso sedare. Tunc enim talis that a pope falsely defamed of heresy refused to clear his
posset pro causa heresis papam ad iudicium provocare, name or to abate the scandal created about him either by
non sibi heresim imponendo sed allegando quod papa submitting to judgement or by some other appropriate
super crimine heresis mendaciter diffamatus exortum means. For in such a situation this person might
scandalum sedare tenetur. Tertia pars est quod deceptus challenge the pope to judgement for cause of heresy, not
habens iustam causam credendi papam esse hereticum by imputing a heresy to him, but by alleging that a pope
posset licite a papa catholico appellare.
falsely slandered of the crime of heresy is obligated to
abate the created scandal. The third part holds that a
deceived individual having just cause to believe that the
pope is a heretic may licitly appeal from a catholic pope.
Discipulus: Nova quidem et irrationabilia, ut michi Student: It surely appears to me that you are pouring
videtur, infers auribus meis. Prima enim pars apparet into my ears theses both new and unreasonable. For the
michi vera sed duas sequentes reputo falsas, et tamen first part appears to me to be true, but I consider the two
pro omnibus allegationes audire desidero.
parts which follow to be false. Nevertheless, I would like
to hear arguments in support of all three parts.
Magister: Pro prima sic arguitur. Appellans directe pro Master: This is how one argues in favour of the first
causa heresis ab aliquo heresim imponit eidem. Sed part. One who appeals directly from someone for cause
nulli non decepto licet imponere heresim pape catholico, of heresy imposes heresy on that someone. But it is not
ergo etc. Pro secunda parte sic arguitur. Salus catholice permitted to one who is not deceived to impose heresy
fidei preferenda est summo pontifici quantumcunque on a catholic pope, therefore, etc. Here is the argument
sciatur catholicus. Si ergo papa catholicus super heresim in favour of the second part. The safety of the catholic
diffamaretur, ex qua infamia periclitaretur fides, si faith is to be preferred to the supreme pontiff, no matter
nollet se catholicum declarare in favorem fidei how much the latter is known to be a catholic. Therefore
christiane, liceret contra papam appellare provocando if a catholic pope was slandered of heresy (a disgrace
eum ad iudicium ut videlicet cogeretur pro salute fidei endangering the faith), and if he refused to declare
suam innocentiam declarare, et ita indirecte licet pro himself a catholic in favour of the Christian faith, it
causa fidei a papa catholico appellare. Pro tertia parte would be permitted to appeal against the pope,
allegatur sic. Cui licet pro aliqua causa appellare si non challenging him to judgement, so that, namely, he would
est deceptus eidem licet pro eadem causa appellare si be forced to declare his innocence for the safety of the
absque culpa sua est deceptus, sicut iudex deceptus per faith; and thus it is indirectly allowed to appeal from a
falsos testes vel falsa instrumenta eandem potest licite catholic pope for the cause of the faith. For the third part
proferre sententiam quam liceret sibi proferre si eadem one argues thus. He who may appeal for some cause if
causa esset per testes legitimos vel vera instrumenta he is not deceived is allowed to appeal for the same
probata. Propter quod ecclesia decepta falsam cause if he is deceived through no fault of his own, just
proferendo sententiam non peccat, imo peccaret si, as a judge who is deceived by false witnesses or false
decepta, sententiam que est iniusta ex parte rei non ex legal documents may licitly render the same decision
parte ferentis non ferret. Sed qui scit papam esse which he would be allowed to render if the same cause
hereticum potest contra eum licite appellare. Ergo were proved by legitimate witnesses or authentic legal
deceptus habens iustam causam credendi papam esse documents. This is why the deceived church does not sin
hereticum quamvis non sit potest contra eum pro causa when it pronounces a false judgement; indeed the church
heresis licite appellare. Ad probandum autem quod would sin if, when deceived, it would not pronounce a
aliquis potest habere iustam causam credendi aliquem judgement, which is unjust as to its substance though not
esse hereticum quamvis in rei veritate non sit hereticus, as to its source. But he who knows that the pope is a
quere argumenta libro *** De optimo genere heretic may licitly appeal against him. Therefore a
addiscendi.
deceived individual having just cause to believe that the
pope is a heretic (though in fact he is not) may licitly
298

