ready to be corrected.)

Magister Ad hoc respondetur quod ratio praedicta de
tali non concludit quia ille praesumitur paratus corrigi et
etiam cauta sollicitudine quaerere veritatem quando non
apparet quod damnabiliter negligit corrigi nec apparet
quod sui erroris amore omittit quaerere veritatem

Master The response to this is that that argument is not
conclusive about such a person because he is presumed
to be ready to be corrected and also to be seeking the
truth with cautious responsibility when it is not clear
that he is culpably neglecting to be corrected and it is
not clear that he is omitting to seek the truth out of love
for his error.

(Fr reads: Magister Non bene attendisti ad differentiam
assignatam inter dictos duos modos. Quamvis enim
errans secundo modo quandoque censeatur hereticus
apud Deum, non tamen etiam forum ecclesie in quo
omnis ille presumitur paratus corrigi ac etiam cauta
sollicitudine quaerere veritatem.)

(Fr reads: Master You have not attended well to the
designated difference between those two ways. For
even if someone erring in the second way is sometimes
considered a heretic before God, yet it is not also so
before the forum of the church, where every such
person is presumed to be ready to be corrected and also
to be seeking the truth with cautious responsibility.)

Talis autem est ille de cuius opinione nullum est
scandalum exortum nec eius opinio tanquam
haereticalis reprehenditur a peritis. De illo autem cuius
opinio tamquam haereticalis reprehenditur a peritis et
de qua scandalum est exortum si quando oportet et ubi
oportet aut sicut oportet non quaerit cauta sollicitudine
veritatem est violenta praesumptio quod nollet
veritatem suae opinioni contrariam declarari sed magis
vellet opprimi veritatem. Quia si, teste Innocentio papa,
ut habetur dist. 83. c. Error, "veritas cum minime
defensatur opprimitur", multo magis cum veritas
minime quaeritur quando quaeri debet opprimitur.
Oppressor autem veritatis catholicae pertinax et
haereticus est censendus.

A person about whose opinion no scandal has arisen
and whose opinion has not been censured by the
learned as heretical is like this. If, however, he whose
opinion is censured by the learned as heretical and
gives rise to scandal does not seek the truth with
cautious responsibility when it is fitting, where it is
fitting and as is fitting, there is a violent presumption
about him that he refuses to have a truth opposed to his
opinion made plain but would prefer the truth to be
suppressed. For if, as we find in dist. 83. c.[3] Error,
Pope Innocent [III] attests "When the truth is not
defended it is suppressed", [col.401] it is much more
the case that when the truth is not sought when it ought
to be sought it is suppressed. A suppressor of catholic
truth, however, should be considered pertinacious and
heretical.

Secunda ratio est haec. Magis vel non minus delinquit
qui seipsum cum potest et debet ab errore non revocat
quam qui alios cum potest et debet ab errore non
revocat. Sed qui alios cum potest et debet ab errore non
revocat inter errantes damnabiliter computatur
secundum quod sacri canones testantur aperte. Ergo qui
seipsum cum potest et debet ab errore non revocat inter
errantes damnabiliter numeratur. Sed errans de cuius
errore scandalum est exortum et qui tanquam haereticus
reprehenditur a peritis si de veritate renuit informari
seipsum cum potest et debet ab errore non revocat. Ergo
inter errantes damnabiliter est censendus . Talis autem
est pertinaciter errans quia errare absque pertinacia
errantem non reddit damnabilem. Talis ergo pertinax et
haereticus est censendus .

The second argument is this. He is more, or not less, at
fault who does not restrain himself from error when he
can and should than he who does not restrain others
from error when he can and should; but he who does
not restrain others from error when he can and should
is counted among those erring culpably, according to
what the sacred canons clearly testify; he who does not
restrain himself from error when he can and should,
therefore, is numbered among those erring culpably;
but if an errant from whose error a scandal has arisen
and who is censured by the learned as heretical refuses
to be instructed about the truth, he is not restraining
himself from error when he can and should; he should
be considered, therefore, among those erring culpably;
such a person is, however, pertinaciously an errant,
because to err without pertinacity does not make an
errant culpable; such a person, therefore, should be
considered pertinacious and heretical.

157

