quomodolibet niterentur, doctrinas autem aliorum (et papal doctrine which was obviously erroneous, while
maxime pauperum) disputabiles et excusabiles, imo exerting themselves to condemn, misrepresent, and
veras et catholicas, licet doctrinis quorundam falsify the meaning of doctrines held by others, and
theologorum contrarias, dampnare et pervertere ac ad above all by Mendicants, doctrines which were arguable
malum sensum trahere conarentur.
and excusable, indeed true and catholic, even if contrary
to the doctrines of certain theologians.
Magister: Respondetur quod talium doctorum nequitia Master: The answer is that the moral worthlessness of
faciliter describi non potest, quia tales ab omni amore such doctors could not be easily described, for people of
et zelo veritatis sunt penitus alieni, ostendentes aperte this kind are deeply alienated from any love of and zeal
quod nequaquam amore scientie et veritatis ad for the truth. Their behaviour clearly indicates that they
magisterium ascenderunt, sed propter gulam aut never rose to the status of master for the love of
honores vel divitias obtinendas in studio laboraverunt. knowledge and truth, but laboured at the university for
the sake of their gullet or for the purpose of acquiring
honours or riches.
Discipulus: Quibus vitiis sunt tales censendi impliciti. Student: What vices should we believe such people to
be involved in.
Magister: Respondetur quod tales sunt acceptatores Master: The answer is that such individuals discriminate
personarum. Talibus enim loquitur Isaias 5 capitulo, about persons for selfish advantage. For it is their ilk that
dicens: "Ve qui potentes estis ad bibendum vinum et Isaiah addresses in his 5th chapter, saying: "woe unto
viri fortes ad miscendam ebrietatem, qui iustificatis them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength
impium pro muneribus et iustitiam iusti aufertis ab eo". to mingle strong drink; which justify the wicked for
Tales enim doctores qui iustificant papam hereticum reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous
'pro muneribus', hoc est pro beneficiis, gratiis et from him"[Isaiah 5:22-23]. For such doctors who justify
honoribus obtinendis, et 'iustitiam iusti' auferunt 'ab eo', a heretic pope 'for reward', that is to say for the sake of
veritatem sue doctrine perperam pervertendo et ad obtaining benefices, favours, and honours, and who 'take
malum sensum (ut placeant pape heretico) inique away the righteousness of the righteous from him', by
trahendo, sunt 'potentes ad bibendum vinum', quia inter wickedly misrepresenting the truth of his doctrine, and
alios fines malos quos spectant per magisterium unethically falsifying its meaning in order to please a
obtinere, impletio ventris cibo et potu infimum locum heretic pope, they are 'mighty to drink wine', because
minime tenet, ut de eis vere dicatur illud Apostoli ad among the various nasty ends they are seeking to achieve
Philip. 3: "quorum deus venter" est, quia propter by the status of master, the filling of their belly with food
ventrem et honorem et alia terrena commoda and drink is hardly last on the list. The statement of the
consequenda et incommoda devitanda laborant in Apostle in Philippians 3 truly applies to them "whose
studio et addiscunt. Unde et de quolibet tali doctore god is their belly" [Philippians 3:19], for they labour and
dicit Salomon Prov. 28: "qui cognoscit in iudicio learn at the university for the sake of their belly and so as
faciem non facit bene. Iste et pro buccella panis deserit to gain access to honour and to other worldly
veritatem". Ille 'cognoscit faciem in iudicio' qui conveniences, while avoiding inconveniences. Hence it is
doctrinam manifeste erroneam ideo nititur excusare vel of any doctor of this stripe that Solomon says in proverbs
etiam defensare quia a papa est tradita et inventa, et 28: "to have respect of person is not good: for a piece of
doctrinam pauperis catholicam et excusabilem, ut pape bread that man will transgress"[Proverbs 28:21]. He has
heretico placeat, contra mentem dicentis ad malum 'respect of persons' who strives to excuse or even defend
satagit trahere intellectum, qui 'pro buccella panis' id an obviously erroneous doctrine simply because it is
est pro uno bono convivio ubi confusionem non metuit discovered and popularized by a pope; and who busies
temporalem, catholicam paratus est deserere veritatem. himself in falsifying the meaning of a Mendicant's
catholic and excusable doctrine, twisting the author's
intended understanding in order to please a heretic pope.
'For a piece of bread', i.e. for one good dinner party at
which he fears no temporal anxiety, he is ready to
abandon catholic truth.
Discipulus: Ex hiis coniicio quod si unquam aliquis Student: I surmise from these comments that if ever
papa futurus manifestus erit hereticus, patebit aperte some future pope becomes a manifest heretic, it will be
qui doctores illius temporis zelo veritatis catholice et clearly apparent which doctors of that time would have
propter hereticos convincendos (si unquam insurgerent) laboured at the university for zeal of the catholic truth
in studio laboraverunt, et qui propter terrena scientie and in order to overcome heretics (if such were to arise),
operam impenderunt.
and which doctors devoted effort to learning for the sake
of worldly convenience.
Magister: Nonnullis apparet quod hic falleris, quia Master: It appears to a few that here you would be
teste Christo multi "ad tempus credunt et in tempore wrong, for as Christ attests: "these for a while believe,
temptationis recedunt". Sic forte nonnulli, si papa esset and in time of temptation fall away"[Luke 8:13]. So
452

