an paratus sit corrigi suam assertionem revocando. Si David was not the son of Jesse, or that Jeroboam was not
autem non est paratus corrigi tunc licet appellare, the king of Israel), and in that case one must not
impugnando videlicet doctrinam hereticam et docentem immediately appeal from the pope. But if a scandal
hereticum si fuerit pertinax deprehensus.
develops concerning this assertion, one must ascertain by
minute investigation whether the pope is ready to be
corrected by revoking this assertion. Indeed if he is not
ready to be corrected, then it is permitted to appeal,
namely by opposing the heretical doctrine, and its
heretical teacher if he is discovered to be pertinacious in
his opinion.
Capitulum 35
Chapter 35
Discipulus: Non videtur quod in hoc casu sit Student: It does not appear that in the case described
appellandum a papa, sed magis apparet quod one would need to appeal from the pope; it seems more
accusandus est papa. Nam appellatio seu provocatio vel to the point that one would have to accuse the pope. For
fit a iudice vel se gerente pro iudice, vel fit extra an appeal or a challenge is made either from a judge (or
iudicium ne aliquid fiat in preiudicium appellantis super from someone functioning as a judge), or is made
eo pro quo appellat. Sed primo modo non est outside of the courtroom so as to prevent the occurrence
appellandum a papa si docet aut predicat hereticam of something prejudicial to the appellant as to the issue
pravitatem, quia docendo aut predicando non tenet concerning which he is appealing. But in the first
locum iudicis nec se gerit pro iudice sed gerit se pro instance one must not appeal from a pope if he teaches
doctore vel predicatore aut assertore. Nec secundo modo or preaches heretical wickedness because in teaching or
est in hoc casu appellandum a papa, quia talis appellatio preaching he does not perform a judicial office nor acts
est respectu alicuius futuri ne fiat, sicut quando aliquis as though he were, but he functions rather as a doctor or
appellat ne electio aliqua fiat in preiudicium appellantis, a preacher or a theorist. Nor does the second instance of
talis appellatio respicit electionem futuram, ne videlicet the case described obligate one to appeal from the pope,
fiat. Sed assertio pape heretica quam predicavit aut because such an appeal is concerned with the prevention
docuit est preterita. Ergo a papa taliter predicante non of some future event. For instance, when someone
est appellandum secundo modo.
appeals in order to prevent some election from occurring
which is prejudicial to the appellant, such an appeal
concerns an election yet to be, namely so as to prevent
its occurrence. But the assertion of the pope which he
preached or taught is an event of the past. Therefore in
the second instance one must not appeal from a pope
preaching in this manner.
Magister: Dicunt nonnulli, sicut tactum est prius, quod Master: As mentioned earlier, some say that they don't
non intendunt loqui de appellatione stricte secundum mean to speak of an appeal in the strict sense (as positive
quod in iure positivo accipitur quando dicunt quod licet law understands this) when they affirm that it is
appellare a papa docente hereticam pravitatem, sed permitted to appeal from a pope who teaches heretical
intendunt loqui de appellatione largissime secundum wickedness. What they mean to speak of is an appeal in
quod omnis impugnatio facto vel verbo pape docentis the widest sense, whereby every opposition by word or
hereticam pravitatem potest dici appellatio, et isto modo by deed to a pope who teaches heretical wickedness may
licet appellare a papa heresim predicante, quia licet be referred to as an appeal. And this is the way in which
cuilibet catholico talem heresim impugnare et papam si one is permitted to appeal from a pope who preaches
fuerit pertinax accusare.
heresy, because every catholic is allowed to oppose this
heresy, and to accuse the pope should the latter prove to
be pertinacious.
Discipulus: Isti loquuntur improprie cum dicunt quod Student: These theorists speak inaccurately when they
omnis impugnatio pape potest dici appellatio, quia say that every opposition to a pope may be termed an
manifestum est quod omnis accusatio est impugnatio, appeal, because it is obvious that every accusation is an
accusatio autem distinguitur ab appellatione, ergo non opposition, and an accusation differs from an appeal,
omnis impugnatio est appellatio.
therefore not every opposition is an appeal.
Magister: Isti, ut dixi, de proprietate locutionis in hac Master: As I have already mentioned, these theorists are
materia non curant.
not concerned in this matter with technical verbal
accuracy.
Discipulus: Quare.
Student: Why.
Magister: Quia, ut dixi prius, non reputant necessarium Master: Because, as I have stated earlier, they do not
absolute appellare quantum est de iure in quocunque deem it absolutely necessary to issue a legally proper
casu a papa heretico vel heresim predicante, vocando appeal in any case whatsoever from a heretic pope or a
appellationem quando verbum appellandi emittitur. Sed pope preaching heresy, if by appeal you mean the
327

