enim: "principes mundi ideo sunt ut dominentur about this text [Matthew 20:25-27], for he states: "the
minoribus suis et eos servituti subiciant et expolient et rulers of the world exist to dominate their lesser
usque ad mortem eis utantur ad suam utilitatem et brethren, subject them to slavery, despoil them, and use
gloriam. Principes autem ecclesie fiunt ut serviant them unto death for their own service and glory. But the
minoribus et ministrent eis quecunque acceperunt a rulers of the church are created to serve the small and
Christo ut suas utilitates negligant et illorum procurent". ministrate unto them all that they have received from
Ex quibus verbis patet distinctio inter principes Christ, to the point of neglecting their own utilities so as
seculares et principes ecclesiarum, quia principes to promote those of the lesser brethren". [Marsilius,
seculares suis subditis dominantur, principes autem II.iv.13] From these words a distinction between secular
ecclesie minoribus serviunt et ministrant. Ergo in eos rulers and the rulers of churches clearly emerges, for
iurisdictionem coactivam exercere non valent. Hiis secular rulers dominate their subjects, while rulers of
etiam Ambrosius concordare videtur qui, ut recitatur 23 churches serve and ministrate to lesser brethren.
q. 8 c. Convenior , ait: "dolere potero, flere potero, Therefore they have no authority to exercise coercive
gemere potero, adversus arma milites Gothosquoque jurisdiction over them. Ambrose too seems to be in
lacrime mee mea arma sunt, talia enim munimenta sunt agreement with these views. He states (we have this in
sacerdotis, aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere". Ex 23 q. 8 c. Convenior)[col. 960] : "I may grieve, I may
quibus verbis habetur quod sacerdos orationibus et weep, I may groan, against arms, soldiers, and Goths my
lacrimis debet malis resistere et non per potentiam tears are my weapons, for those are the defences of the
temporalem, et per consequens non habet iurisdictionem priest. I neither can nor ought to resist by other means".
coactivam.
[Marsilius, II.v.5] From these words we learn that a
priest must resist evildoers by prayers and tears, and not
by temporal force, and consequently that he does not
have coercive jurisdiction.
Quod etiam Chrysostomus in libro suo Dialogorum qui Chrysostomus likewise seems to accept this, and most
De dignitate sacerdotali intitulatur lib. 2 cap. 3 super openly too, in his volume of dialogues which is entitled
illud Apostoli 2 Cor. 1 "non quia dominamur fidei Concerning the priestly dignity. In book 2, chapter 3
vestre" apertissime sentire videtur. Ait enim: "hii qui thereof, commenting on the Apostle's text from 2
foris sunt iudices malignos quosque cum subdiderint Corinthians 1[:24] "not for that we have dominion over
ostendunt in eis plurimam potestatem et eos invitos a your faith" he states: "Outsider judges demonstrate
priorum morum pravitate compescunt, in ecclesia vero potent authority against their evildoing subjects, and
non coactum sed acquiescentem oportet ad meliora force them against their will to abandon the wickedness
converti quia nec nobis a legibus data est talis potestas of their prior behaviour, but in the church it is required
ut auctoritate sententie cohibeamus homines a delictis". that we convert to better actions a person who is not
Clarius dici non posset quod ecclesia non habet coerced but consenting, for indeed neither are we given
iurisdictionem coactivam, cum in ecclesia nullus debeat by the laws such power as to restrain men from crimes
ad meliora cogi nec aliquis debeat cohiberi per through the authority of a legal judgment". [Marsilius,
iudicialem sententiam a delictis. Item, ad habentem II.v.6] It cannot be stated more clearly that the church
iurisdictionem coactivam spectat negotiis secularibus does not possess coercive jurisdiction, since in the
implicari quia ad ipsum pertinet contentiones et lites church no one must be forced to do better actions nor
dirimere. Contentiones autem lites et rixe inter negotia can someone be restrained from crimes by a judicial
secularia computantur (Extra Ne clerici vel monachi sentence. Furthermore: he who has coercive jurisdiction
secularibus negotiis se immisceant c. 1). Sed ad needs to be involved in secular affairs, for it is his task to
summum pontificem non pertinet secularibus negotiis settle disputes and lawsuits, and disputes, lawsuits and
implicari, teste Apostolo 2 Tim. 2 qui ait: "nemo quarrels are classified as secular issues (Extra, Ne clerici
militans implicat se negotiis secularibus". Ergo ad vel monachi secularibus negotiis se immisceant, c. 1).
summum pontificem ex ordinatione Christi non pertinet But is it not the business of the supreme pontiff to be
iurisdictio coactiva.
involved in secular affairs, as the Apostle witnesses (2
Timothy 2[:4]) who states: "No man that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life".
[Marsilius, II.v.1] Therefore coercive jurisdiction does
not pertain to the pope by Christ's dispensation.
Item, papa non habet maiorem iurisdictionem ex Again: the pope does not possess greater jurisdiction by
ordinatione Christi quam habuit beatus Petrus. Sed Christ's dispensation than did blessed Peter. Yet blessed
beatus Petrus et alii apostoli iurisdictionem coactivam a Peter and the other apostles did not receive coercive
Christo minime acceperunt. Ergo nec papa habet jurisdiction from Christ. Therefore neither does the pope
iurisdictionem coactivam ex ordinatione Christi. Maior have coercive jurisdiction by Christ's dispensation. The
est manifesta. Minor probatur auctoritate beati Bernardi major premiss is self-evident. The minor is proved by
qui in libro ad Eugenium papam ait: "non monstrabunt, the authority of blessed Bernard, who states in the book
puto, qui hoc dicerent ubi aliquando quispiam to Pope Eugenius: "They will not show, I think, those
273

