predicta, ideo pro contraria allegare conare.

the aforementioned assertion. Therefore attempt to argue
in favour of the contrary assertion.
Magister: Quod omnes impugnantes papam hereticum Master: It appears that one may prove by many reasons
cum circumstantiis debitis, licet non appellent, sint a that all opponents of a heretic pope, appropriate
catholicis defendendi videtur multis rationibus posse circumstances taken into account, must be defended by
probari. Est autem prima ratio talis. Qui sancte, rite, et catholics even if they do not issue an appeal. And the
legitime causam omnium fidelium prosequuuntur sunt first reason is this. Those who pursue the cause of all the
ab omnibus fidelibus defendendi. Qui enim negotium faithful religiously, properly, and legally, must be
alicuius gerit utiliter auxilium et favorem ab eo meretur, defended by all the faithful. Indeed he who usefully
aliter enim erit ingratus et nequam non reddens bonum performs another's business deserves his assistance and
pro bono. Sed impugnantes papam hereticum causam support, otherwise the latter would be a thankless and
omnium fidelium prosequuntur, quia causa fidei est worthless person who does not reward a good deed with
causa omnium catholicorum. Ergo sunt ab omnibus its like. But opponents of a heretic pope pursue the cause
catholicis defendendi.
of all believers, because the cause of faith is the cause of
all catholics. Therefore these opponents must be
defended by all catholics.
Secundo sic. Magis tenentur catholici et fideles Here is the second reason. Catholics and believers are
defendere prosequentes causam fidei que est causa more obligated to defend those who pursue the cause of
omnium quam teneatur papa defendere illos qui causas faith, which is the cause of everyone, than a pope is
proprias prosequuntur. Sed papa debet defendere illos obligated to defend those who pursue their personal
qui causas proprias prosequuntur, teste Zepherino papa causes. But a pope is bound to defend those who pursue
qui, ut habetur 2 q. 6 c. Ad Romanam, ait: "ad Romanam their personal causes, witness Pope Zephyrinus who
ecclesiam ab omnibus maxime tamen ab oppressis est states in 2 q. 6 c. Ad Romanam: "all people and most of
appellandum et concurrendum quasi ad matrem ut eius all those who are oppressed must appeal to the Roman
uberibus nutriantur, auctoritate defendantur, a suis church, and fly to it as to a mother so as to be nourished
oppressionibus releventur". Ergo multo magis si by her breasts, defended by her authority, and relieved of
impugnantes papam hereticum ad quoscunque their oppression". [col. 468] Therefore all the more must
concurrerint orthodoxos, sunt ab eis defendendi.
the opponents of a heretic pope be defended by
whichever orthodox persons they have resorted to for
this assistance.
Tertio sic. Magis sunt defendendi a catholicis The third reason is this. In order not to suffer as a result
impugnantes hereticam pravitatem, ne propter of this opposition, the opponents of heretical wickedness
impugnationem huiusmodi patiantur, quam sint socii a must be defended by catholics to a greater extent than
sociis. Sed socius socium debet defendere, teste partners must defend one another. But a partner must
Ambrosio qui in libro 'De officiis', ut legitur 23 q. 3 c. defend a partner, witness Ambrose who state in the book
Non inferenda, ait: "qui enim non repellit a socio 'On offices' as we read in 23 q. 3 c. Non inferenda: "for
iniuriam, si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille, qui facit". he who does not, if he can, prevent a partner from being
Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod socius socium debet harmed is just as guilty as the one who commits the
contra iniuriantem defendere. Ergo multo magis misdeed". [col. 898] We gather from these words that a
catholici debent impugnantes hereticam pravitatem partner must defend a partner against someone doing
defendere ne propter impugnationem huiusmodi him wrong. Therefore all the more must catholics defend
iniuriam patiantur.
opponents of heretical wickedness lest they suffer harm
due to such opposition.
Quarto sic. Non minus tenentur catholici defendere Here is the fourth reason. Catholics are not less bound to
impugnantes hereticam pravitatem quam ecclesia defend opponents of heretical wickedness than the
teneatur defendere sceleratos et impios qui ad eam church is obligated to defend criminals and immoralists
confugiunt, cum boni magis sint defendendi quam mali. that flee to it for safety, since the good are more to be
Sed ecclesia tenetur defendere malos fugientes ad ipsam defended than the bad. But the church is obligated to
(17 q. 4 c. Frater et coepiscopus noster et c. Sicut) et in defend the criminals who flee to it for security (17 q. 4 c.
multis aliis decretis sanctorum patrum idem habetur. Frater et coepiscopus noster, [col. 817] and c. Sicut),
Ergo multo magis catholici tenentur defendere [col. 816] and we find the same point in many other
impugnantes hereticam pravitatem.
decrees of the holy fathers. Therefore all the more must
catholics defend the opponents of heretical wickedness.
Discipulus: Quod ecclesia defendit malos fugientes ad Student: The fact that the church defends criminals who
ipsam est ex privilegio speciali quale non habent flee to it for security is due to a special privilege, which
impugnantes hereticam pravitatem.
is not enjoyed by the opponents of heretical wickedness.
Magister: Hec responsio impugnatur, quia ubi est Master: This response is rejected, because where the
eadem ratio debet esse idem ius. Sed ratio quare ecclesia reason is the same the law must be the same. And the
defendit malos fugientes ad ipsam est ut honor ecclesie reason why the church defends criminals who flee to it
329

