pronuntiantem legem christianam esse falsam et legem judge if this is someone from whom an appeal is not
sarracenorum esse tenendam nequaquam licite allowed. Thus, one may legitimately appeal to the
provocatur, cum sit alterius fidei quam catholici. Ad emperor as to temporal matters because one is not
iudicium autem hominis alterius fidei catholicis non permitted to appeal from him in this regard. But one can
licet provocare, testante concilio Carthaginensi quod, ut in no way legitimately appeal to a pope who definitively
habetur 2 q. 6 c. Catholicus, ait: "catholicus qui causam proclaims that the Christian law is false and the law of
suam sive iustam sive iniustam ad iudicium alterius the Saracens is to be embraced, since such a pope would
fidei iudicis provocat, excommunicetur". Ergo ad papam profess a faith different from that of catholics. And
pronuntiantem diffinitive legem sarracenorum esse catholics are not allowed to appeal to the court of a
tenendam provocare non licet, et per consequens licet person professing a different faith, witness the Council
appellare ab ipso. Undecimo sic. Ab excommunicato of Carthage which states (we have it in 2 q. 7
pro iudice se gerente licet appellare. Sed papa Catholicus) [col. 478]: "a catholic who appeals his case,
pronuntians diffinitive legem christianam esse falsam be it just or unjust, to the court of a judge who is of
est excommunicatus sicut et ille qui incidit in heresim another faith shall be excommunicated". Therefore it is
iam dampnatam, teste glossa 24 q. 1 c. 1 que ait: "hic est not permitted to appeal to a pope who proclaims
casus in quo papa papam potest ligare, in quo papa in definitively that the law of the Saracens must be
canonem late sententie incidit". Ergo ab ipso appellare followed, and consequently one is allowed to appeal
licet. Duodecimo sic. Contra illam sententiam appellare from him. The eleventh reason is this. It is permitted to
licet que nec est tenenda nec servanda nec timenda, quia appeal from an excommunicated individual functioning
illa sententia a qua appellare non licet est timenda. Sed as a judge. But a pope who definitively proclaims that
sententia diffinitiva qua papa pronuntiat legem the Christian law is false becomes excommunicated, just,
christianam esse falsam nec est tenenda nec servanda as is someone who falls into a heresy already
nec timenda, quia sententia contra legem divinam condemned. The gloss [col. 1382] to 24 q.1 c.1 witnesses
prolata non est timenda, sicut nec aliquod preceptum as much when it states: "here is a case where one pope
contra legem Dei est timendum. Ergo a tali sententia may bind another, namely where the latter falls under the
appellare licet. Tertiodecimo sic. Ab illo est licitum jurisdiction of an established sentence". Therefore it is
appellare qui potest licite recusari. Sed papa pronuntians permitted to appeal from such a pope. Here is the twelfth
legem christianam esse falsam in omni causa fidei reason. It is permitted to appeal against a judgement,
potest licite recusari quia inimicus potest licite recusari. which is neither to be maintained nor observed nor
Talis autem papa esset omnium christianorum et totius feared, because a judgement from which one may not
legis christiane inimicus manifestus. Ergo a tali papa appeal is to be feared. But a definitive sentence whereby
licet in causa fidei appellare.
the pope proclaims that the Christian law is false is
neither to be maintained nor observed nor feared,
because a sentence rendered against the divine law is not
to be feared, just as no command against the law of God
is to be feared. Therefore one is allowed to appeal from
such a judgement. The thirteenth reason is this. It is
permitted to appeal from someone who may be subject
to a lawful demurrer. But a pope who proclaims that the
Christian law is false may be lawfully demurred against
in every case of faith, because an enemy may be lawfully
demurred against, and such a pope would be an obvious
enemy of all Christians and of the entire Christian law.
Therefore it is permitted to appeal from such a pope in a
case of faith.
Capitulum 20
Chapter 20
Discipulus: Videtur quod argumentis abundas pro Student: It appears that you have very many arguments
assertione predicta, ideo non multiplices amplius in support of the assertion we are discussing, therefore
argumenta sed quomodo, ad quandam instantiam quam do not accumulate arguments any further, but kindly
faciam contra predicta, secundum assertionem investigate how one ought to respond on the basis of the
predictam debeat responderi, indagare digneris. Videtur assertion we are reviewing to a certain objection which I
itaque quod omnia argumenta predicta nichil concludant will be making against the aforesaid. Here it is. It seems
quia papa pronuntians diffinitive legem christianam esse that all of the stated arguments are inconclusive, because
falsam est inter infideles indubie numerandus. Ab a pope who definitively proclaims that the Christian law
infideli autem fideles appellare non debent. Nusquam is false must without any doubt be included among the
enim legitur quod sancti martyres cum cogerentur unbelievers. And the faithful must not appeal from an
negare fidem ab iudicibus infidelibus appellassent, nec unbeliever, for nowhere does one read that the holy
etiam apostoli contra principes sacerdotum cum martyrs appealed from unbelieving judges when they
protulissent contra fidem sententiam appellaverunt. were being pressured to deny the faith, nor did the
306

