opining, before it was certain to him that he erred, it is enough that he should protest that he said nothing
deliberately, also that he is ready to revoke if he learns that he has erred.
The first of these is shown by authority, examples and argument. It is shown evidently first, indeed, by the
authority of Pope Leo, 1, q. 7, c. Saluberrimum. For he says this: "It is most healthy, and most full of the utility
of spiritual medicine, that those---whether priests or deacons or sub-deacons or clerics of any order--- who wish
to be seen to have been corrected and strive to come back to the Catholic faith, which indeed they had lost,
should first of all confess their errors and the authors of the error condemned by themselves, without any
ambiguity, so that, with all wicked ideas eliminated, no occasion will remain for fearing that any member of such
an order could be violated by their fellowship, since in all respects their own profession will begin to prevent
them". From these words we gather evidently that all in error against the faith who wish to be seen to have been
corrected are obliged to revoke their errors.
(But perhaps you will say that it seems possible to infer from this text that those who err in any way at all are
bound to revoke their error if they wish to be seen to have been corrected, the opposite of which is assumed in
the second point that follows from what was said. It is easy to answer this. Those who err in the first, second,
third, and fourth ways, if they learn that they have erred, are bound to wish to be seen to have been corrected,
and therefore they are bound to revoke their errors purely and unconditionally. However, those who err in the
fourth way, if they do not learn that they have erred, are not at that time bound to wish to be seen to have been
corrected in this matter, and neither are they bound at that time to know that they have erred.)
In favour of the above conclusion there is a council of Pope Martin, in which, as we read 1, q. 7, c . Si quis
episcopus, [he says, "If any bishop] or any bishop's priest, deacon or acolyte has offended opinion, and for that
reason has been excommunicated, let no bishop receive him into communion, unless first, having offered a
written statement of his faith, he satisfies everyone , in common council, and in this way holds his purgation
free. The same has been decided also concerning faithful lay persons, if they are caught up in some opinion of
heresy". By these words we are given to understand that all in error against faith who are obliged to revoke their
errors, should confess their faith purely, and consequently should revoke their errors purely and without
condition. This can also be understood, or gathered evidently, from a decree of Pope Lucius, found in Extra, De
haereticis, Ad abolendam.
Because the above texts and others concerning this matter can indeed be drawn to a perverse understanding, two
points must be noted. [i] The first is that in the above texts some things are laid down which are from human and
positive law. However, they contain something from divine law, which no supreme pontiff or general council is
able to change. The above authorities assert that those who err against faith are obliged to revoke their error
purely, which is true according to divine law, in respect of the simplicity of revocation, especially if some
persons have been scandalised by the error. For they ought to lay aside the error, and to root out scandal they
must confess that they have erred and confess the Catholic faith, in accordance with the text of Matthew 10[:32],
"Therefore all who confess me before men, I will confess also before my father who is in heaven", and Romans
4 [10:10], "For, with the heart, we believe unto justice: but, with the mouth, confession is made unto salvation.
However, that, according to the council of Pope Martin, those in error should offer a written confession of faith
in common council, and that, according to Pope Lucius, heretics should forswear their heresy, are from a human
and positive law enacted for good reason, which can for good reason be changed.
[ii] Second it must be known that heretics are bound to revoke their error in such a way that they ought simply
and purely confess that they have been gravely at fault, and therefore according to canon law they are to be
punished severely; but those who err [ignorantes: errantes?] against faith only out of simplicity and ignorance
without any pertinacity, although they should to revoke their error purely and without any condition,
nevertheless they are not obliged to confess that they have sinned (at least mortally) by erring. And after such
revocation no penance should be imposed on them, unless perhaps voluntarily or as a precaution or out of
humility they wish to undergo penance, and on account of such error they should not be marked by any ill fame.
And thus it is clear from the texts that all heretics, whether knowing or unknowing, who wish to be seen to have
been corrected, and also all Catholics who err after they learn that they have erred, should revoke their error
purely and without any condition or excuse, confessing that they have erred, and protesting that for the future
they do not intend to err knowingly against Catholic truth.
The same assertion is plainly proved by examples. The first example is found in Decreta, 1, q. 7, c. Maximum,
where Pope Leo says of some heretic, "As for Maximum, also, ordained from the laity, though reprehensibly
[reprehensibili licet: licet reprehensibiliter?], if however he is not now a Donatist and is foreign to any spirit of
schismatical wickedness, let us not drive him from the episcopal dignity he has somehow obtained, so that he
may show himself to be a Catholic by a document addressed to us". It is established by these words that this
former Donatist was obliged to to show that he was a Catholic purely and without any condition, which he could
by no means do except by renouncing the heresy purely and without any condition.
The second example is found in the chapter Donatum [1, q. 7, c. 20], concerning some other person of whom the
same Pope Leo says: "Donatus the Salian converted from Novatian with (as we learn) his people, we wish to rule
over the Lord's flock in such a way that he should remember he must direct to us a document of his faith, by
534

