ad que quis nec iure divino nec iure naturali nec The church cannot from plenitude of power force the
spontanea voluntate noscitur obligari, non potest faithful to perform acts of supererogation, or such as are
ecclesia de plenitudine potestatis fideles artare. Hec known to be excessively burdensome, acts one is known
enim est causa quare ecclesia non potest christianos ad not to be obligated to perform either by divine law, or
votum continentie vel virginitatis artare, quia, ut lex by natural law, or by one's free will. This is indeed the
sacra dicit: "castitas que suaderi potest, imperari non reason why the church cannot force Christians to vow
potest". Similiter ecclesia non potest cogere christianos chastity or virginity, because, as the sacred law states:
religionem mendicantium vel monachorum intrare, quia "chastity may be advocated, but cannot be ordered". [32
hoc supererogationis est, et causa quare ad ea que q. 1 c. 13, col. 1119] Similarly, the church cannot force
supererogationis sunt non potest ecclesia christianos Christians to enter a religious Order of mendicants, or
compellere, est quia talia excessive sunt gravia, ad que monks, because this is a supererogatory matter. And the
christiani lege divina vel iure naturali minime reason why the church cannot compel Christians to
obligantur. Quare ad ea prelati christianos obligare non perform acts of supererogation is because such acts are
debent, ne sint de numero illorum de quibus dicit exceedingly burdensome, and Christians are not
Christus Matthei 23: "alligant autem onera gravia et obligated to perform them by divine law or by natural
importabilia et imponunt in humeros hominum: digito law. Therefore, prelates must not obligate Christians to
autem suo nolunt ea movere". Ad ea igitur que sunt perform such acts, lest the prelates be numbered among
excessive difficilia et gravia non potest ecclesia those of whom Christ states in Matthew 23: "for they
regulariter obligare fideles, licet ex causa et pro culpa ad bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
talia possit aliquos obligare, quemadmodum aliquibus them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not
pro culpa precedenti matrimonium interdicit, et aliquos move them with one of their fingers". [Matthew 23:4]
in monasteria etiam invitos statuit retrudendos. Cum Therefore the church cannot, as a rule, obligate the
igitur mortem suscipere et res suas amittere et gravia faithful to perform acts which are excessively difficult
tormenta subire, et talia consimilia, sint inter excessive and onerous, although it may obligate some to such
gravia computanda, ecclesia per nullam constitutionem performance for cause and fault. For instance, it forbids
potest regulariter christianos in aliquo casu, in quo ad matrimony to some on the basis of a prior misdeed, and
huiusmodi nec per legem divinam nec per legem nature it commands that individuals be locked up in
nec per voluntatem spontaneam obligantur, astringere. monasteries even against their will. Therefore since
Ad
non
communicandum
autem
corporaliter death, loss of property, harsh torture, and the like are
excommunicato, christiani nullo predictorum modorum numbered among excessively onerous experiences, the
tenentur vel artantur, quia si ad hoc aliquo predictorum church cannot, as a rule, constrain Christians by any
modorum essent astricti, etiam de dispensatione pape legislation to perform or accept such specifics where
non possent aliqui communicare excommunicatis, quod Christians are not obligated to do so by divine law, by
constat esse falsum. Ergo ecclesia regulariter per natural law, or by their own free will. And indeed
aliquam
constitutionem
generalem
sub
pena Christians are neither bound nor forced by any of the
excommunicationis non potest quemlibet obligare ut nec stated sources to refrain from physical communication
metu mortis vel amissionis rerum corporaliter with an excommunicated person, for if they were bound
communicet excommunicatis.
to avoid this by any of the stated sources, then none
could communicate with excommunicated individuals
even by papal dispensation, a fact evidently false.
Therefore as a rule the church cannot obligate anyone
by some general statute, under penalty of
excommunication,
to
refrain
from
physical
communication with excommunicated individuals, even
if threatened by death or loss of property.
Cum vero dicis quod ecclesia non haberet tunc And when you say that in that case the church would not
plenitudinem potestatis, respondent quidam quod have plenitude of power, some thinkers respond that it
summe necessarium esset hiis diebus, quod per sapientes would be of the highest necessity in these times of ours
iuramentis et horribilibus comminationibus per reges ad that kings pressure wise men by oaths and dreadful
veritatem dicendam artatos, declararetur que spectant ad threats to declare the truth as to matters relevant to the
plenitudinem potestatis quam ecclesia noscitur obtinere. plenitude of power which the church is known to
Dicunt enim quod aliqui literati, ut beneficia possess. For these thinkers claim that some of the
ecclesiastica consequantur, ita ampliant plenitudinem learned, in order to obtain ecclesiastical benefices,
potestatis ecclesie, quod omnem iurisdictionem magnify the church's plenitude of power to such an
laicalem, imo omne dominium et proprietatem laicorum extent that they obviously eliminate every lay
in quibuscunque rebus temporalibus manifeste evacuant. jurisdiction, indeed every lordship and property of
Quod tamen scripture divine aperte repugnat, cum etiam laymen in any temporal goods whatsoever. And this
infideles secundum scripturam sacram rerum clearly clashes with Holy Writ, since according to
temporalium habeant dominium et proprietatem, nec Sacred Scripture even non-believers possess lordship
469

