sicut conceditur quod congregacio fidelium errare non
potest et tamen simul cum hoc conceditur quod
concilium generale contra fidem errare non potest.

against faith, just as it is granted that the
congregation of believers can not err and yet along
with this it is also granted that a general council can
not err against faith.

Ad ultimam dicitur quod collegium cardinalium in
questionibus fidei terminandis requirit aliorum
consilium ut magis autentificetur per consensum
plurium determinacio eorumdem.

It is said to the last that the college of cardinals needs
the advice of others in determining questions of faith
so that their determination may be more validated by
the agreement of many.

Capitulum 10

Chapter 10

Discipulus Exiguitati mee videtur quod ad raciones
septimam, octavam et nonam sufficienter responsum
existit, sed ad raciones alias responsiones nequaquam
intelligo, quarum tamen discussionem maiorem usque
ad aliud tempus volo differri. Nunc autem occasione
predictorum scire desidero quid senciunt scolastici de
collegio cardinalium una cum papa, an scilicet papa et
omnes cardinales simul possint pravitate heretica
irretiri.

Student: It seems to me in the smallness [of my
opinions] that an adequate response has been made to
the seventh, eighth and ninth arguments, but I do not
understand the replies to the other arguments.
Nevertheless I want to defer a fuller discussion of
them to another time. Now, however, prompted by
the foregoing I want to know what scholars think
about the college of cardinals together with the pope,
that is whether the pope and all the cardinals can be
entangled at the same time in heretical wickedness.

Can pope and cardinals be heretics together?
Magister Circa hoc sunt diverse opiniones. Quidam
enim dicunt quod papa non potest errare contra fidem,
et eciam illi qui asserunt quod collegium cardinalium
non potest contra fidem errare habent dicere
consequenter quod papa una cum collegio cardinalium
non potest errare contra fidem. Quorum racio videtur
esse precipua quia Romana ecclesia non potest errare
contra fidem. Ecclesia autem Romana est papa una cum
collegio cardinalium; ergo etc.

Master: There are various opinions about this. For
some people say that the pope can not err against
faith, and, in addition, those who affirm that the
college of cardinals can not err against faith have to
say as a consequence that the pope together with the
college of cardinals can not err against faith. Their
principal argument seems to be that the Roman
church can not err against faith; however the Roman
church is the pope together with the college of
cardinals; therefore, etc.

Item sedes apostolica errare non potest contra fidem;
sedes autem apostolica papam et collegium cardinalium
tantummodo comprehendit; ergo, etc.

Again, the apostolic see can not err against faith;
however the apostolic see consists of the pope and
the college of cardinals only; therefore, etc.

Alii asserunt manifeste quod papa una cum toto
collegio cardinalium potest errare contra fidem.
Quorum raciones fundamentales tacte sunt prius: tum
quia si papa cum cardinalibus non posset errare frustra
ad questiones fidei terminandas generalia concilia
congregarent, tum quia de una sola ecclesia habetur
quod errare non potest, tum quia extra papam et
cardinales est salus, tum quia omnes simul possunt
crimine irretiri, ergo omnes simul possunt contra fidem
errare.

Others affirm plainly that the pope together with the
whole college of cardinals can err against faith. Their
basic arguments have been touched on above: firstly,
that if the pope together with the cardinals were
unable to err it would be in vain that general councils
gathered to determine questions of faith; secondly,
that it is held of only one church that it can not err;
thirdly, that there is salvation outside the pope and
the cardinals; finally, that all of them can at the same
time be entangled in wickedness and so they can at
the same time all err against faith.

Capitulum 11
201

Chapter 11

