eis minime subvenitur. Ergo quilibet tenetur alium obligated to feed the hungry and to give drink to the
defendere, si potest, si non appareat alius qui velit et thirsty, if there is no one else available to help. Therefore
possit eum defendere.
everyone capable of this is obligated to defend another if
no other individual emerges willing and able to do it.
Discipulus: Adducas exempla pro assertione eadem.
Student: Present examples in favour of the assertion we
are discussing.
Magister: Primum exemplum est de Abraham qui, ut Master: The first example is that of Abraham. We read
legitur Genes. 14, quamvis non haberet iurisdictionem in Genesis 14 [:14-16] that although he did not have
super captivantes Loth fratrem suum et alios, tamen non jurisdiction over the captors of his brother Loth and
solum Loth defendit sed etiam irruit super captivantes others, he nevertheless not only defended Loth but also
eosque percussit et reduxit Loth cum substantia eius.
attacked the captors, struck them down, and brought
home Loth and Loth's property.
Secundum est de Moyse qui Hebreum percussum ab The second example is that of Moses, who defended the
Egyptio defendit, et occidit Egyptium, ut legitur Exod. Hebrew struck by the Egyptian, and killed the latter as
2, de quo scribit Ambrosius, ut habetur 23 q. 3 c. Non we read in Exodus 2 [:11-12] . Ambrose writes of Moses
inferenda, dicens: "cum vidisset Hebreum ab Egyptio in 23 q. 3 c. Non inferenda, and states: "when he saw a
iniuriam accipientem, defendit ita, ut Egyptium Hebrew being harmed by an Egyptian he defended him
prosterneret". Et tamen super Hebreos aut Egyptios tunc by utterly defeating the latter". [col. 898] And yet at that
Moyses nullam iurisdiciariam habuit potestatem. De quo time Moses possessed no power of jurisdiction over
etiam ubi prius Exod. 2 scribitur quod septem filias Hebrews or Egyptians. It is also written of Moses in
sacerdotis Madian a pastoribus defensavit, cum tamen Exodus 2 [:16-17] that he defended the seven daughters
neque super puellas neque super pastores iurisdictionem of the priest of Madian from nomadic herders, and yet he
haberet.
possessed jurisdiction neither over the girls nor over the
herders.
Tertium exemplum est de Raab meretrice que, ut The third example is that of Raab the prostitute. We have
habetur Iosue 2, exploratores filiorum Israel it in Joshua 2 [:4] that she defended the spies of the sons
abscondendo defendit.
of Israel by hiding them.
Quartum est de beato Petro qui etiam arma movendo The fourth example is that of blessed Peter, who
Christum defendere satagebat (Matth. 26), nec videtur attempted to defend Christ even by the use of weapons
de voluntate defendendi reprehensus a Christo, sed quia (Matthew 26 [:51, and cf. John 18:10] ). It does not seem
hesitare videbatur an Christus aliter quam per arma that Christ rebuked him for the original intention, but
poterat defensari, propter quod Christus ipsum acriter only because Peter appeared to doubt whether Christ
increpando dixit: "an putas quia non possum rogare could be defended otherwise than by weapons. This is
Patrem meum et exhibebit michi modo plus quam the reason why Christ strongly chastised Peter by stating:
duodecim legiones angelorum".
"thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
He shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
angels?" [Matthew 26:53]
Quintum exemplum est de discipulis Damasci qui, ut The fifth example is that of the disciples of Damascus
legitur Act. 9, beatum Paulum submittendo illum in who, as we read in Acts 9 [:25] , defended blessed Paul
sporta contra Iudeorum insidias defendebant. Alia against the plots of the Jews by letting him down by the
quamplura exempla quod alii quam prelati in periculo wall in a basket. There are many other examples clearly
positos defendebant tam in scriptura divina quam in aliis recorded in Holy Writ and in other official works, which
scripturis auctenticis scribuntur aperte.
show that people who were not prelates defended those
who were in danger.
Capitulum 44
Chapter 44
Discipulus: Nolo plures allegationes audire pro Student: I do not want to hear any more arguments in
assertione predicta, et ideo dic quomodo possunt support of the assertion under discussion; therefore
obiectiones quas feci dissolvi.
indicate how the objections which I made can be
resolved.
Magister: Prima auctoritas Augustini quam allegas non Master: The first authority of Augustine, which you
loquitur specialiter de iniuriantibus aliis, sed de allege, mentions all types of delinquents and not
delinquentibus in communi. Quia tamen assertores specifically those who harm others. Nevertheless, since
predicti consimiliter dicunt de omnibus peccantibus the theorists you are objecting to state the same position
corrigendis et de passis iniuriam defendendis, ideo ad with respect to the need of correcting all sinners as to the
auctoritatem Augustini predictam respondent dicentes need of defending individuals who suffer harm, they
quod in prima parte loquitur Augustinus de hiis qui consequently respond to the aforementioned authority of
auctoritatem iudiciariam non habentes corrigendo Augustine by saying that in its first segment Augustine is
secrete apud delinquentes nequaquam proficerent, sed speaking about those individuals who do not possess
343

