ponuntur 24. q. 3. c. Dixit apostolus colligitur evidenter;
sed qui correctioni et emendationi illorum quorum
interest subdere se recusat, impediens quoquomodo ne
error suus rite et legitime examinetur, quamvis non sit
vocatus ad iudicium, non est paratus corrigi nec quaerit
cauta sollicitudine veritatem. Ergo pertinax haereticus
est censendus.

pertinacious and heretical, as is clearly gathered from
the words of Augustine found in 24, q. 3, c. [29] Dixit
apostolus (cols.1428-9); but he who refuses to submit
himself to correction and amendment by those whose
concern it is, and impedes in any way at all the
appropriate and legitimate examination of his error,
even if he has not been called to court, is not ready to
be corrected and is not seeking the truth with cautious
responsibility; he should be considered, therefore,
pertinacious and heretical.

Amplius, ipsa veritate testante, ut habetur Iohannis 3, c.
"Qui male agit odit lucem et non venit ad lucem ut non
arguantur opera eius." Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod
qui non venit ad lucem ut non arguantur opera eius male
agit. Nam si non male ageret faceret veritatem. Si autem
faceret veritatem veniret ad lucem, ibidem veritate
dicente, "Qui autem facit veritatem venit ad lucem".
Errans ergo contra fidem si non venit ad lucem districti
iudicii et clari examinis illorum quorum interest
illuminare errantem male agit. Ista autem malicia non
est nisi pertinacia. Ergo talis pertinax et haereticus est
censendus.

Furthermore, as we find in John 3:[20], the Truth
Himself testifies that "He who behaves badly hates the
light and avoids it so that his deeds will not be made
known." From these words we gather that he who
avoids the light so that his deeds will not be known
behaves badly. For if he were not behaving badly he
would do what is true; if he were to do what is true,
however, he would come into the light, as the Truth
says in the same place [John 3:21] "He who does what
is true comes into the light." If one who errs against the
faith does not come into the light of strict judgement
and open examination by those whose concern it is to
enlighten the erring, therefore, he behaves badly; that
badness, however, is nothing but pertinacity; such a
person, therefore, should be considered pertinacious
and heretical.

Discipulus Per istam rationem apparet quod omnis
errans, nisi statim veniat ad lucem petens suam
assertionem per illos quorum interest examinari et
discuti, est pertinax reputandus. Quod nimis videtur
durum quia multos theologos crimine pertinaciae
implicaret.

Student It appears from that argument that everyone
who errs should be regarded as pertinacious unless he
immediately comes into the light and seeks to have his
assertion examined and inquired into by those whose
concern it is. This seems too harsh because it would
involve many theologians in the charge of pertinacity.

Magister Sicut scis praecepta affirmativa obligant
semper sed non pro semper. Et ideo errans quamvis
teneatur venire ad lucem iusti iudicii non tamen pro
omni tempore ad hoc tenetur. Sed non impedire
iudicium fieri cum sit negativum pro omni tempore
obligat. Et ideo ille dicendus est venire ad lucem qui
paratus est venire ad lucem quando expedit et oportet.
Et ideo licet non omni tempore veniat ad lucem petendo
suam assertionem discuti diligenter non est pertinax
reputandus, sed quandocunque ne assertio sua arguatur
nititur impedire ne ad examen debitum deducatur est
dicendus odire lucem et non venire ad lucem ut non
arguatur assertio eius, et ideo tunc est merito pertinax
iudicandus. Ex praedictis isti inferre conantur quod si
papa aliquam haeresim dogmatisat et impedit generale
concilium celebrari ne sua assertio discutiatur pertinax
et haereticus est censendus.

Master [See Significant Variants, para. 24.]
Affirmative precepts are always binding, as you know,
but not for always. Although someone who errs is
bound to come into the light of a just judgement,
therefore, he is nevertheless not bound to this on every
occasion. But since "not to prevent judgement being
made" is a negative [precept] it is binding on every
occasion. He should be said to come into the light,
therefore, who is prepared to come into the light when
it is appropriate and fitting to do so. And therefore even
if he does not on every occasion come into the light by
seeking to have his assertion carefully inquired into he
should not be regarded as pertinacious; but whenever
he tries to prevent his assertion being brought to due
examination, lest it be reproved, he should be said to
hate the light and not to come into the light lest his
assertion be reproved; and he is then, therefore,
deservedly judged to be pertinacious. They try to infer
from the above that if the pope teaches some heresy as
doctrine and prevents the celebrating of a general

.
155

