perfidiam reprobando, eidem consentiunt et simili wickedness [1 Dial. 7.42,43]. Therefore if they do not
modo cum eo sunt culpabiles reputandi. Unde virtute resist a heretic pope when they have the power to do so
istius medii omnes auctoritates supra capitulo 38 by condemning his treachery, they consent to his action
introducte (et alie que sonare videntur quod qui non and are to be reckoned as guilty as he is. Note that a
resistit peccanti cum potest, consentit) ad predictam consequence of this approach is that all the authorities
conclusionem possunt adduci.
introduced earlier in chapter 38 (as well as others which
appear to denote that he who does not resist a sinner
when he can, consents to the sinner's act) may be utilized
to reach the same conclusion.
Quarto principaliter sic arguitur. Omnis perfidia The fourth main argument is this. Every treachery of the
inimicorum fidei odio est habenda, teste Psalmista qui enemies of the faith must be hated, witness the Psalmist
ait: "iniquos odio habui," et alibi ait: "omnem viam who states: "I hated the wicked" [Psalms 118:113], and
iniquam odio habui," et rursus ait: "nonne qui oderunt elsewhere he states: "I have hated every evil way"
te Domine oderam, et super inimicos tuos tabescebam. [Psalms 118:128], and again he states: "do not I hate
Perfecto odio oderam illos, inimici facti sunt michi." Ex them, O Lord, that hate Thee? And am not I grieved with
quibus verbis colligitur quod omnis nequitia et malitia those that rise up against Thee? I hate them with perfect
odio est habenda, et quod inimici Dei in quantum sunt hatred: I count them mine enemies"[Psalms 138:21-22].
inimici Dei odio sunt habendi. Quod etiam ipse We gather from these words that every villainy and
Salvator testatur Luc. 14: "si quis venit ad me et non wickedness must be hated, and that the enemies of God
odit patrem suum et matrem et uxorem et filios et must be hated in so far as they are enemies of god. And
fratres et sorores adhuc autem et animam suam, non the Saviour himself attests to this in Luke 14: "if any
potest esse meus discipulus". Ex quibus verbis man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
colligitur quod hoc est in omni homine odiendum quod wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his
est in eo Deo contrarium. Perfidia autem pape heretici own life also, he cannot be my disciple"[Luke 14:26].
est Deo contraria, ergo odio est habenda. Sed We gather from these words that we must hate in the
predicatores et doctores odio non habent perfidiam person of every man what is in opposition to God. And
pape heretici nisi ipsam, debitis circumstantiis the treachery of a heretic pope is opposed to God,
observatis, detestantur, persequuntur, et improbare therefore it must be hated. But preachers and doctors do
nituntur. Ergo predicatores et doctores ipsam oportet not hate the treachery of a heretic pope unless, taking
perfidiam pape heretici reprobare. Maior videtur account of appropriate circumstances, they detest it,
evidens. Minor aperte probatur. Quia sicut secundum persecute it, and attempt to repudiate it. Therefore it is
beatum Gregorium probatio dilectionis exhibitio est proper that preachers and doctors condemn this treachery
operis, ita etiam probatio odii exhibitio est operis. Et of a heretic pope. The major premiss of the argument
secundum eundem Gregorium amor non est otiosus sed seems evident. The minor is patently proved. For just as,
multa operatur si est. Ita etiam odium non est otiosum according to blessed Gregory, the proof of love is its
sed multa operatur si est. Amor enim et odium sunt active practice [Homilia 30 in Evangelia, ad Ioh. 14:23cause distincte distinctos effectus habentes, et ideo 31, in PL 76, col. 1220], so likewise the proof of hate is
sicut ex amore, si est, multi sequuntur effectus, ita its active practice. And according to the same Gregory
etiam ex odio plures effectus emanant. Quare ex odio si love is not idle but produces many effects if it exists
est verum respectu perfidie pape heretici in [ibid., col. 1221]. And in similar fashion, hate is not idle
predicatoribus et doctoribus opera exteriora sequuntur. but produces many effects if it exists. For love and hate
Persecutio autem est effectus odii, et similiter are separate causes, which produce separate effects, and
reprobatio et detestatio exterior. Quare si predicatores therefore just as many effects follow from love if it
et doctores vere odiunt perfidiam et malitiam pape exists, so also do many effects follow from hate. Hence if
heretici, ipsam efficaciter persequuntur. Quod the hate of a heretic pope's treachery be true in preachers
Augustinus, ut habetur 23 q. 4 c. Duo ista, insinuare and doctors, there will follow visible acts. But
videtur dicens: "duo ista nomina cum dicimus, homo persecution is an effect of hate, and so is a visible
peccator, non utique frustra dicuntur. Quia peccator est, condemnation and detestation. Hence if preachers and
corripe, et quia homo, miserere, nec omnino liberabis doctors truly hate the treachery and wickedness of a
hominem, nisi cum persecutus fueris peccatorem. Huic heretic pope, they will persecute it with effect. This is
officio nominis invigilet disciplina", et infra: "ita nulli what Augustine seems to convey when he states (as we
homini claudenda est misericordia sicut nullo peccatori read in 23 q. 4 c. Duo ista): "when we utter these two
impunitas relaxanda". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod words, 'sinner man', they are certainly not uttered in vain.
quilibet ex necessitate tenetur, quantum sibi licet pro Since he is a sinner, rebuke him, and because he is a
gradu suo et officio, corripere et persequi peccatorem. man, show him mercy, nor will you ever liberate the man
Ergo predicatores et doctores oportet persequi modo unless you will have persecuted the sinner. Verbal
congruenti sibi, scilicet reprobando perfidiam pape precision diligently secures such a process"[col. 915],
heretici.
and further on: "thus mercy is to be denied to no man,
just as exemption from punishment is to be granted to no
438

