established that the Jews persecuted the apostles out of a certain love of truth; however they were not to be
excused on that account. Therefore neither is he to be excused of heresy because he would more willingly hold
the opposite of his error if it were shown to him to be true. Again, the Apostle says of the Jews, Romans 4 [10:
2], "For I bear testimony of them, that they have indeed a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge", where
the Gloss says, "They think they act for love of God, but they do not have true love of God". From these words it
is possible clearly to infer that a person can impiously defend a heresy thinking that he does so out of love of
truth, though true love of truth he does not have, and therefore he is not excused for defending error; and so by
the fact that this man believes that his assertion is true and would more willingly hold its contrary if he believed
it to be true, he cannot be excused of heresy, though from this fact it can be established that [he does this] by a
certain false love of truth.
Before his conversion Paul persecuted the Church of God and denied the incarnation of Christ, for which he
would have laboured more willingly if it had been proved to him; and yet despite this he was not able to be
excused of his damnable error. Therefore though this man believes that his assertion is true, and would more
willingly hold the contrary if it were proved to him to be true and necessary, he will not be able to be excused of
heretical wickedness by this, but by this it can be established that he assents to error from a certain false love of
truth. Again by the above words no more can be established than that this man errs ignorantly; but ignorance
does not always excuse, and especially does not excuse in this case, as will be shown below; therefore by the
above words he cannot be excused of heretical wickedness.
That ignorance does not always excuse is manifestly clear by what Peter says to the unbelieving Jews in Acts
chapter 3[:17]: "Brothers, I know that you did this through ignorance, as did also your leaders". From these
words we gather plainly that is the Jews adhered to their errors ignorantly, and yet they were not able to be
excused by such ignorance. Thus, though he may hold and defend the above-mentioned heresy ignorantly, and
would more willingly hold the contrary assertion if that were proved to him to be true, nevertheless by this he
will not be able to be excused of heretical wickedness. For in that way all the Jews, Saracens, pagans, idolaters
and heretics, indeed in general all who err, can excuse themselves of their errors. For scarcely anyone could be
found who would not say that he would more willingly hold the contrary assertion if it were plainly proved to
him to be true. For who would say that he holds a falsity more willingly than the truth?
It is clear therefore from the foregoing, that this man, the inventor of the heresy mentioned, will not be able to be
excused of heresy by the words above and others like them. However, it must be noticed that although precisely
by such words a person who errs against the faith cannot be excused of heretical wickedness, still it must not be
said that every person erring against the faith and trying to excuse himself by such words must be regarded as a
heretic, because someone erring against the faith attempting to excuse himself by such words from heretical
wickedness can in some case be immune. But this man, the inventor of heresy oft-mentioned, can in no way
excuse himself of heretical wickedness, as will be shown below.
Therefore when he says, "We would willingly favour another conclusion, and more willingly than that negative
conclusion ", he does not speak asserting or expressing an opinion, but only reporting, " if that were shown to be
true and necessary". Therefore by the above words he cannot be excused of heresy, as has been shown before.
And when he says, "If it were clear in faith that the souls now see the face of God, no one would have a duty to
defend that faith so much, nor would defend it, more than we", we gather evidently that he does not believe that
the souls of the saints now see the face of God, because he says that "if it were clear", no one would defend it
more than he: but he does not defend it, indeed he attacks it. Therefore he does not believe that it is clear in faith.
"For I am Christ's vicar": also these words suggest that he would be obliged to defend it in this way [delete
tamen?] because often Christ's vicar general should more defend the honour of the principal Lord than some
particular [vicar].
Again, "How could anyone believe that if the soul of my father or mother clearly saw the face of God, that I
would wish to deny it - perish the thought!" From these words also we learn that he does not believe that the
separated soul of any person clearly sees God's face.
"Hence if the truth were proved more clearly, then we would stand willingly, and more, in favour of the
affirmative conclusion rather than the negative": here he suggests that he does holds the negative conclusion only
from love of truth, but by such words he is not at all excused of heretical wickedness.
CHAPTER 9
It continues:
Although after we were in that state [i.e. after we became pope] we particularly studied the original writings of
the saints and have taken up [or attended to - attendimus below] questions they raise in this material, and have
often mentioned them in sermons---and this was very useful, because others either do not possess their original
writings or do not take the trouble to study them. For there are students and others attached to certain writings
who regard them as Gospels and epistles, and seek little further. And therefore, because we have studied those
matters in the original writings, we have made them known, we have investigated them.
Here he assigns the reasons why he wished to promulgate and publicly preach the aforesaid assertion, namely
that it was because he possessed and studied the original writings of the saints, so he says, and others either do
527

