iudicare, saltem per modum doctrine. Pro hac autem what their meaning is. It seems possible that they are
opinione videntur tali ratione posse moveri. Iuxta moved by the following argument for this opinion.
sententiam sapientis, unusquisque bene iudicat de hiis According to the maxim of the wise man, "Everyone
que novit et horum bonus est iudex. Canoniste autem judges well those things which he knows, and of these
magis noscunt illa que in eorum libris traduntur quam he is a good judge." [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics I.4,
alii. Ergo ad ipsos de intellectu eorum principaliter 1094b 33] But canonists know better than others the
pertinet iudicare.
contents of their books. It pertains chiefly to them,
therefore, to judge their meaning.
Iterum pro ista opinione alia ratio potest adduci. Quia ad Again, another argument can be brought forward for that
nullos magis spectat aliquorum notitia quam ad opinion. Knowledge of any matters pertains to no one
tractatores illius scientie que ipsa considerat, ergo ad more than to the experts on the science that considers
nullos magis spectat notitia illorum que in iure traduntur them. Knowledge of what is handed on in the canon law
canonico quam ad tractatores canonici iuris, cuiusmodi pertains to no one, therefore, more than to experts on
sunt canoniste. Ad ipsos ergo principaliter spectat de canon law, such as the canonists. It chiefly pertains to
intellectu illorum discernere.
them, therefore, to determine their meaning.
Capitulum 8
Chapter 8
Magister: SED ALIIS ista opinio minime placet. Dicunt Master: BUT THIS OPINION does not please others.
enim quod ad canonistas spectat de multis que For they admit that it pertains to canonists to have a
reperiuntur in libris eorum maiorem habere memoriam: greater memory of many things that are found in their
de pluribus autem et tenaciorem memoriam et books: of more things, however, theologians, if they are
profundiorem intellectum theologos, si perfecti fuerint, excellent, ought to have both a more tenacious memory
oportet habere; nonnulla vero secularium legum periti et and a deeper understanding; some things those skilled in
profundius intelligunt et non minori commendant secular laws do indeed understand more deeply and
memorie; quedam autem naturali prediti ratione et in entrust to a not inferior memory; some things , however,
philosophia eruditi morali ac scientie rationalis those gifted in natural reason, learned in moral
nequaquam ignari et plenius intelligunt et non minus philosophy and not ignorant of rational science both
memorie noscuntur imprimere. Nulla vero canoniste understand more fully and are known to imprint not less
intelligunt profundius, licet propter maiorem multorum on their memory. Canonists, in fact, understand nothing
memoriam quis sit aliquotiens intellectus quorundam more deeply, even if sometimes on account of a greater
promptius valeant explicare, ad quem alii tardius, licet memory of many things they can more readily explain
profundius, cum magno labore et studio pervenirent. Si what the meaning of something is, a meaning at which
autem aliqui canoniste in scientia rationali , in others would arrive more slowly, though more deeply,
philosophia morali, iure civili, et theologia plene essent with great labour and study. If, however, some canonists
instructi, ad illos principalissime pertineret ea que in were fully instructed in rational science, moral
libris habentur eorum et tenaciori memoria retinere et de philosophy, civil law, and theology, it would most
ipsorum intelligentia promptius et perfectius iudicare. chiefly pertain to them both to retain in a more tenacious
memory what is found in their books and to judge its
meaning more readily and excellently.
Ad evidentiam autem predictorum dicunt isti esse Now to make the foregoing clear they say that it should
notandum quod libri canonistarum non sunt nisi quedam be noted that the books of the canonists are nothing but
collectiones ex auctoritatibus Biblie et originalium collections of biblical texts, texts from the books [on the
theologorum sanctorum et ex quibusdam legibus meaning of originalia see Mary and Richard Rouse,
imperialibus et ex constitutionibus ac diffinitionibus Authentic Witnesses (Notre Dame, 1991),p.250] of holy
sive determinationibus conciliorum et summorum theologians, texts from some (b) imperial laws and from
pontificum in quibus quedam pure theologica the statutes and decisions or determinations of councils
explicantur et declarantur, sicut in illis quibus hereses and highest pontiffs in which some (a) purely
condemnantur et veritates catholice approbantur, ut patet theological matters are explained and declared, as in
Extra, De summa trinitate et fide catholica, c. 1, et c. those by which heresies are condemned and catholic
Damnamus et Extra, De hereticis, Cum Christus et in truths approved. This is clear in Extra, De summa
pluribus aliis capitulis in decretis insertis. Quedam vero trinitate et fide catholica, c. 1 [col.5] and c. Damnamus
pure moralia traduntur in eis que nulla possunt ratione [col.2], in Extra, De hereticis, c. Cum Christus [col.779],
convelli , sicut in capitulis decretorum et decretalium and in many other chapters inserted in the Decretals.
patet innumeris. Quedam autem precipiuntur in eis et Certain (c) purely moral matters which no reason can
prohibentur que sunt pure positiva ex humana overthrow are handed down in them too, as is clear in
dependentia voluntate, que pro necessitate et utilitate innumerable chapters of the Decretum and Decretals.
possunt rationabiliter variari seu penitus abrogari, ut And certain things are commanded and forbidden in
patet Extra, De consanguinitate et affinitate c. Non debet them which are (d) purely positive , depending on
et dist. 14 c. Sicut quedam.
human will, and which can, for necessity and utility,
reasonably be varied or wholly repealed, as is clear in
12

