essence than it had in the rapture. Therefore one seeing the divine essence can be exalted to a higher degree of
perfection, namely of the vision of the divine. The minor is manifest, according to everyone. The major is proved
by the authority of Augustine (To Orosius), who speaks thus: "Paul was taken up into the third heaven, i.e. to
intellectual vision, so that he perceived God not through a body, nor through the likeness of a body, but as he is
truth itself". By these words it is clearly established that in the rapture Paul's soul saw God. The same is proved,
second, again by the authority of Augustine in Literal Commentary on Genesis, Book 12. He says: "We judge,
not unsuitably, that he sees by the mind things secret, and remote and altogether removed from the bodily senses,
and purified, in such a way that in the charity of the Holy Spirit he was able ineffably to see and hear the things
that are in heaven and the substance of God himself and God the Word, through which were made all things, and
that the Apostle was taken up to there."
From these words we gather evidently that blessed Paul was taken up to the vision of God's substance, and yet
Paul's soul after his death was exalted to a clearer vision. That in the rapture Paul saw the divine essence is found
also in the gloss on 2 Corinthians 12[:2], which says this: "The third spiritual (supply heaven), where angels and
the souls of the saints enjoy the contemplation of God, to which, however, he (i.e. Paul) says that he was taken
up, signifies that God showed him the life in which he is to be seen eternally.... I know such a man taken up (i.e.
taken up against nature) as far as the third heaven (i.e. to knowledge of the divinity)... The third heaven is
intellectual vision, when neither bodies nor images of them are seen, but in bodily substances an intuition of the
mind is formed by the miraculous power of God. The Apostle was taken up to this, so as to see God himself in
himself, not in any figure.... This is the third heaven, namely the vision by which God is seen face-to-face, and
this is indeed (if we can speak this way) the paradise of paradises... He says he was taken up into this third
heaven, as if to say, he saw not by human sense, and if he saw while the soul was in the body, this is not contrary
to that which God says to Moses, 'No man will see me and live', for the Apostle did not then see as a man, i.e.
according to the use of the bodily senses, because every human sense was taken away from them, because the
mind must be taken away from this life, when one is received into the light of that ineffable vision. And it is not
thus incredible for this excellence of revelation to have been granted also to certain saints not yet dead so that
their buryable bodies remain. So why should we not believe that, to this extent, the Apostle, the teacher of the
gentiles, was taken up to this most excellent vision? God wished to show the life in which after this life he is to
be seen forever. And why should that region not be called paradise where God is present to the soul, namely
where it sees ineffably the very substance of God, the Word of God and the Holy Spirit?... This is the third
heaven, to which the Apostle says he was taken up, that he might see God as they (supply: the angels) see God....
The third, cognition even of the divinity, to which the Apostle was taken up.... He was taken up into paradise, i.e.
into that tranquility which they enjoy who are in the celestial fatherland, Jerusalem; and thus he was able to see
what he could never see impeded by the bodily senses.... He heard the hidden words, i.e. he received an
intimation of the secret knowledge of God".
From these words we clearly gather three things: First, that blessed Paul saw the divine essence in the rapture,
because in the above words this is repeated many times, verbally or in substance. The second is that the souls of
the saints now see God, since the "third" heaven is said to be "spiritual, where angels and the souls of the saints"
are said to be, namely where they "see ineffably the very substance of God, the Word, and the Holy Spirit".
From these two points it follows evidently that a soul seeing God can be exalted to a clearer vision, because
blessed Paul's soul now sees, and will see after the judgment, God more clearly than he saw him in the rapture,
and the souls of the saints will see him more clearly after the judgment than they seem him now. The third point
that follows from the above is that the inventor of the above heresies boasts in vain and emptily that he has
studied the original works of the saints, since in the most common glosses drawn from the original works of the
saints he did not see those things that are expressed so clearly.
[2] It is proved second as follows: When some form that is the same in species is shared by one more perfectly
and by another less perfectly, it must not be said that God cannot (if he pleases), by his absolute power, exalt the
one sharing the form less perfectly to a higher degree of the same form. For such a form can be augmented.
Therefore it is not impossible for it to pass from a lesser to a greater degree. But the vision of the divine essence
is shared by one more perfectly and by another less perfectly; for one sees the divine essence more clearly than
another. For just as star differs from star in brightness, according to the Apostle 1 Corinthians 15[:41], so does
one soul see more clearly than another. Augustine in his book De Correptione (quoted De Poenitentia, dist. 4, c.
In Domo) manifestly asserts this. He says, "Thus he prepares us for himself and himself for us, that he may
remain in us and we in him, as far as each will share in him, more or less, according to the difference of merits.
And this is the manyness of mansions". Therefore it must not be said that God cannot, if he wishes, exalt a soul
seeing God to a clearer degree of vision.
The second heretical point contained in the above words is that if someone's soul sees the divine essence, the
whole person, composed of the soul seeing the divine essence and the body, cannot be exalted. For this most
clearly conflicts with and contradicts the Apostle's words in Philippians 2[:8]. For speaking of Christ the Apostle
says, "He humbled himself, being obedient unto death, even death on a cross; for which reason God has also
exalted him". These words clearly establish that Christ, after death, when he assumed a glorious body, was
517

