impugnans verbo alicuius iudicis sententiam diceretur acception everyone who verbally opposes the sentence
appellare ab eodem, quod nullam verisimilitudinem of some judge would be said to be appealing from him,
habet. Secundum vero quartum membrum inobediens which is quite implausible. While according to the fourth
sententie iudicis absque omni verbo appellandi diceretur acception someone who disobeyed the sentence of a
appellans.
judge would be considered an appellant without having
uttered a single word to that effect.
Magister: Ad hec solvenda dicitur esse notandum quod Master: It is said that in order to solve these points one
secundum iura dupliciter appellare contingit, scilicet must note that according to the laws there are two ways
verbo et facto. Quod verbo appellare contingat tu of appealing, namely, by word and by deed. You
concedis, quod etiam facto valeat quis appellare asserit yourself concede that one can appeal verbally. And
Innocentius tertius manifeste qui, ut habetur Extra, De Innocent III clearly asserts that one may appeal by deed
appellationibus, c. Dilecti, ait: "cum autem plus sit ad when he states in Extra, De appellationibus, c. Dilecti:
sedem apostolicam facto provocare quam verbo etc." "since it is indeed weightier to appeal to the Apostolic
ubi dicit glossa: "plus est factis demonstrare quam see by deeds than by word etc.", [col. 432] where the
verbis dicere" et glossa 11 q. 3 c. Existimant ait: "ipso gloss says: "it is weightier to make a demonstration by
facto appellamus". Ex quibus verbis patet quod quartum deeds than to make verbal statements", [col. 947] and the
membrum congrue assignatur, quia scilicet facto gloss to 11 q. 3 c. Existimant [col. 666] says: "the deed
contingit appellare a sententia pape lata contra fidem. itself is our appeal". [col. 951] It is clear from these
Non autem aliter contingit appellare facto a sententia words that the fourth element of the distinction is
pape lata contra fidem nisi facto ostendendo quod talis pertinently assigned, because it does indeed happen that
sententia est tanquam heretica reprobanda. Ergo quartus one appeals by deed from a sentence of the pope
ille modus appellandi congrue assignatur. Quia vel plus rendered against the faith. But one does not appeal by
vel non minus est manifeste et constanter asserere viva deed from a sentence of the pope which was rendered
voce vel scripto sententiam pape esse hereticam quam against the faith unless one demonstrates by deed that
facto innuere eandem sententiam pape esse hereticam, such a sentence must be rejected as heretical. Therefore
sed, sicut ostensum est, qui facto insinuat sententiam this fourth meaning of "appeal" is pertinently assigned.
pape esse hereticam facto intelligitur appellare, ergo et For it is of greater or at least not of lesser weight to
qui verbo vel scripto sententiam pape tanquam assert clearly and continuously in speech or in writing
hereticam constanter impugnat intelligitur appellare licet that the sentence of the pope is heretical, than to imply
verbum appellandi non scribat vel proferat.
that same sentence to be heretical by deed. But as has
been shown, he who implies by deed that the pope's
sentence is heretical is understood to appeal by deed.
Therefore he likewise who continuously opposes the
pope's sentence as heretical by word or script is
understood to be appealing even though he neither writes
nor utters the word itself.
Discipulus: Dic quomodo secundum ista ad Student: State how this is used to refute the
inconvenientia que intuli respondetur.
inconveniences that I have advanced.
Magister: Ut responsiones ad illa percipias duo Master: They say two things must be noted for you to
dicuntur esse notanda. Primum est quod sicut cuilibet grasp the responses to these inconveniences. The first is
christiano interest sententiam pape latam contra fidem that just as it is the concern of every Christian to detest,
catholicam detestari, impugnare, reprobare, et horrere, oppose, reject, and be horrified by a papal sentence
ita cuilibet christiano licet si voluerit ab iniqua sententia rendered against the catholic faith, so is it permitted to
pape contra fidem catholicam lata appellare primo et any willing Christian to appeal, in the first and second
secundo modo accepta appellatione, quia ab iniqua acceptions of the term, from an iniquitous sentence of
sententia potest quilibet cuius interest appellare. the pope rendered against the catholic faith, because
Secundo dicitur esse notandum quod, quia papale anyone whose concern this is may appeal from an unjust
officium est supremum in ecclesia Dei nec est aliquis sentence. The second thing to be noted, they say, is that,
qui ex officio sit vero papa superior in spiritualibus, because the papal office is supreme within the church of
ideo quando papa profert sententiam contra fidem, God nor is there anyone who is officially superior in
subtilitates iuris que contra prelates inferiores spiritual affairs to a true pope, therefore when a pope
proferentes sententiam contra fidem servantur, non sunt renders a sentence against the faith, the legal subtleties
stricte servande, nec etiam littera legum civilium et which operate with respect to inferior prelates rendering
canonicarum in hoc casu est omnino servanda, sed a sentence against the faith are not to be strictly
oportet ad legem divinam et rationem naturalem ac observed, nor, to be sure, must the letter of the civil and
intentionem legislatoris et ad legem quam instituisset si canon laws be entirely followed in this case. Divine law,
legem specialem de papa proferente sententiam contra natural reason, the intention of the legislator, and the
fidem constituisset, recurrere. Per hoc respondent ad law, which he would have instituted had he put in place a
primum inconveniens. Quia non omnis impugnans special law about a pope rendering a sentence against the
316

