pronuntiante fidem christianam esse falsam licet principle applies to a heresy that appears to destroy a
appellare est quia talis papa est hereticus et destruit part of the catholic faith as applies to a heresy which
catholicam fidem. Sed papa pronuntians diffinitive negates the entire catholic faith. But it is permitted to
quamcunque heresim esse tenendam est hereticus et appeal from a pope who proclaims that the entire faith of
destruit catholicam fidem. Ubi autem est eadem ratio Christ is false. Therefore it is permitted to appeal from a
debet esse idem ius. Ergo a papa quamcunque heresim pope who proclaims as obligatory belief any heresy
pronuntiante diffinitive esse tenendam licet appellare. contrary to any catholic truth. The fourth argument is
Pro hac assertione possunt adduci rationes supra cap. 18 this. The reason why it is permitted to appeal from a
inducte, quia ille probant quod ab omni papa heretico pope who proclaims that the Christian faith is false is
licet appellare, quamvis patentius quodammodo because such a pope is a heretic and a destroyer of the
concludant quod a papa pronuntiante fidem christianam catholic faith. But a pope who definitively proclaims any
esse falsam licet appellare.
heresy as obligatory belief is a heretic and a destroyer of
the catholic faith. And where the reason is the same the
law must be the same. Therefore it is permitted to appeal
from a pope who definitively proclaims any heresy as
obligatory belief. The reasons listed earlier in chapter 18
may be advanced in favour of this assertion, because
they prove that it is permissible to appeal from any
heretic pope, even though they conclude somewhat more
evidently that it is permitted to appeal from a pope who
proclaims that the Christian faith is false.
Capitulum 34
Chapter 34
Discipulus: Ex predictis adverto quod secundum istos Student: I conclude from the aforesaid that according to
non refert ad hoc quod liceat a papa heretico appellare these theorists in order that one be permitted to appeal
an papa diffinitive pronuntiet legem christianam esse from a heretic pope it does not matter whether the pope
falsam, vel quamcunque heresim que fidei obviet definitively proclaimed the Christian law to be false or
orthodoxe, quamvis etiam plures tenerent talem proclaimed any heresy whatever which contradicts
assertionem fidei catholice nullatenus repugnare.
orthodox belief, even if many were to hold that this
assertion of the pope did not contradict the catholic faith.
Magister: Verum dicis, quia indubitanter tenent quod Master: What you say is true, since these theorists
omnis heresis, quantumcunque a christianis etiam indubitably hold that every heresy must be opposed by
eruditis et in scriptura sacra peritis reputetur catholica, any catholic who knows that it is contrary to catholic
est a quolibet catholico sciente eam veritati contrariari truth, no matter how strongly this heresy is considered
catholice impugnanda, et ideo licet omni catholico a catholic by [other] Christians, even by those among them
papa pronuntiante diffinitive quamcunque heresim esse who are learned and skilled interpreters of Holy Writ.
tenendam appellare.
Therefore it is permitted to every catholic to appeal from
a pope definitively proclaiming any heresy whatsoever
as obligatory dogma.
Discipulus: Quid si papa non pronuntiat diffinitive Student: What if the pope does not proclaim definitively
aliquam heresim esse tenendam, sed publice docet et that some heresy must be held, but publicly teaches and
predicat aliquam heresim esse tenendam, nunquid licet preaches this. Would it be permitted to appeal from him.
appellare ab ipso.
Magister: Respondetur quod appellare licet. Qualiter Master: The answer is that one would be permitted to
tamen et quando liceat appellare oportet attendere appeal. But one is required to note carefully the time and
diligenter. Aut enim papa docet, predicat, dogmatizat the quality of this permitted appeal. For either the pope
aut asserit heresim contrariam veritati catholice quam teaches, preaches, indoctrinates or asserts a heresy which
tenetur explicite credere, et tunc statim licet appellare is contrary to catholic truth which he is bound to believe
non tantum a doctrina iniqua sed etiam a docente explicitly, and in that case one is permitted to appeal
tanquam heretico, quia talis papa statim sine immediately not only from the unjust doctrine, but also
examinatione maiori est hereticus reputandus. Si enim from him who teaches it as being a heretic, because such
papa assereret non esse in divinis tres personas a pope is immediately to be considered a heretic without
distinctas cum teneatur explicite credere Patrem et a major inquiry. If indeed the pope were to assert that
Filium et Spiritum Sanctum esse distinctas personas, there are not three distinct persons in God, then because
statim papa censendus est hereticus. Aut papa predicat he is bound to believe explicitly that the Father, and the
vel dogmatizat heresim contrariam veritati quam non Son, and the Holy Spirit are distinct persons, the pope
tenetur explicite credere, puta si predicaret David non must instantly be thought a heretic. [see OP III, Epistola
fuisse filium Isay vel Ieroboam non fuisse regem Israel, 14.21] Or else the pope preaches and indoctrinates a
et tunc non est statim appellandum a papa. Sed si de heresy that is contrary to a truth that he is not bound to
assertione oritur scandalum, est subtiliter indagandum believe explicitly (for instance, if he were to preach that
326

