crimine heresis diffamato, occasione quarum accedit defamed of the crime of heresy. I now would want to
michi voluntas specialiter indagandi an propter investigate specifically, in connection with these reasons,
appellationem aliquorum contra papam pro causa whether catholics have power to inquire about the
heresis interiectam catholici habeant potestatem supreme pontiff because some of them have issued an
inquirendi de summo pontifice. Cum enim talis appeal against him alleging heresy. Indeed, since such an
appellatio sit diffamatoria pape, videtur, quod si prelati appeal slanders the pope, it would appear, if prelates
habent potestatem inquirendi de papa super crimine have the power to inquire about a pope defamed of the
heresis diffamato, quod etiam propter talem crime of heresy, that they also obtain the same power
appellationem eandem obtinent potestatem. Unde de hoc because of such an appeal. Therefore be so good as to
quid sentiant literati indicare digneris.
indicate what the learned think about this.
Magister: Circa hoc sunt assertiones contrarie, Master: There are contrary assertions on the issue.
quibusdam dicentibus quod in nullo casu est appellationi Some say that under no circumstance must one defer to
contra summum pontificem deferendum nec propter an appeal against the supreme pontiff, nor must anything
eam aliquid est agendum, aliis dicentibus quod be done on its account. Others claim that prelates must
appellationi pro causa heresis contra summum defer to an appeal alleging heresy issued against the
pontificem interiecte debent prelati deferre et propter supreme pontiff, and that the nature of the cause requires
eam oportet eos de iure de tali appellatione cognoscere. them to legally acknowledge the appeal.
Discipulus: Motiva prime assertionis allega.
Student: Present the arguments for the first assertion.
Magister: Prima assertio auctoritatibus et rationibus Master: Authorities and reasons, it seems, can prove the
videtur posse probare. Prima auctoritas est Gelasii pape first assertion. The first authority is that of Pope Gelasius
et ponitur 9 q. 3 c. Ipsi, qui ait: "ipsi sunt canones qui (and it is expressed in 9 q. 3 c. Ipsi) [col. 611] who
appellationes totius ecclesie ad huius sedis examen states: "these are the canons which willed the referral of
voluerunt deferre. Ab ipsa vero nunquam prorsus appeals from the entire church to the scrutiny of this see,
appellare debere sanxerunt". Secunda est eiusdem c. while decreeing that at no time was it ever allowed to
sequenti qui ait: "cuncta per mundum novit ecclesia appeal therefrom". The second authority is of the same
quod sacrosancta romana ecclesia fas de omnibus habet pope (expressed in the next chapter) [col. 611] who
iudicandi, neque cuiquam de eius liceat iudicare iudicio. states: "the entire church throughout the world knew that
Siquidem ad illam de qualibet mundi parte appellandum the sacrosanct Roman church has the right to judge all
est, ab illa autem nemo est appellare permissus". Ex matters, and that no one is allowed to legally question its
quibus verbis colligitur quod in nullo casu a papa judgement. For one must appeal to it from any part of the
appellare licet, quia canones supradicti absolute sine world, while no one is permitted to appeal from it". One
omni distinctione affirmant quod a romana ecclesia gathers from these words that in no case is it allowed to
appellari non licet, ergo nec nos debemus distinguere. appeal from the pope. Because the aforementioned
canons affirm absolutely, without any distinction, that it
is not permitted to appeal from the Roman church,
therefore we also cannot make any distinction.
Discipulus: Pro eadem assertione rationes adducas.
Student: Present reasons in favour of the same assertion.
Magister: Prima ratio talis est. Ab illo qui non habet Master: The first reason is this. One is not allowed to
superiorem in terris appellare non licet (2 q. 6 c. appeal from him who has no superior on earth (2 q. 6 c.
Anteriorum), sed papa non habet superiorem in terris Anteriorum) [col.474] . But the pope has no superior on
cum ipse sit caput et iudex omnium christianorum. Ergo earth since he is the head and the judge of all Christians.
a papa appellare non licet. Secunda ratio est hec. Qui Therefore one is not allowed to appeal from the pope.
licite pro causa heresis appellat ab aliquo est totaliter a The second reason is this. He who appeals legitimately
iurisdictione ipsius exemptus, quia omnis appellans in for cause of heresy from someone is totally exempt from
eo super quo appellat est exemptus a iurisdictione illius that someone's jurisdiction, because every appellant is
a quo appellat (Extra, De appellationibus, Cum exempt from the jurisdiction of the one from whom he
teneamur et c. Proposuit). Qui autem appellat super appeals with respect to the issue concerning which he is
causa heresis appellat super tota iurisdictione illius a appealing (Extra, De appellationibus, Cum teneamur
quo appellat, quia si est hereticus nullam habet [col. 415] , and c. Proposuit) [col. 417] . But he who
iurisdictionem omnino. Ergo qui appellat ab aliquo appeals for cause of heresy appeals from the entire
super causa heresis a iurisdictione ipsius est exemptus jurisdiction of him from whom he appeals, because if the
omnino. Sed nullus christianus est exemptus omnino a latter is a heretic then he possesses no jurisdiction at all.
iurisdictione pape, ergo nulli licet appellare ab ipso. Therefore he who appeals from someone for cause of
Tertia ratio est hec. Ab illo appellare non licet a cuius heresy is completely exempt from that someone's
obedientia non licet recedere, quia appellans recedit ab jurisdiction. But no Christian is totally exempt from the
obedientia illius a quo appellat. Sed nulli christiano licet jurisdiction of the pope. Therefore no one is allowed to
recedere ab obedientia pape (dis. 12 c. Preceptis), ergo appeal from him. The third reason is this. An appeal
nulli christiano licet a summo pontifice appellare. from someone from whose obedience one cannot
Quarto sic. Ab illo appellare non licet ad quem est ab withdraw is not allowed, because the appellant
296

