manifesta; minor aperte probatur, quia ex quo quantum
in ipso est per constitutionem suam omnes christianos,
et per consequens concilium generale cum soli
Christiani generali concilio debeant interesse, artat ad
suam assertionem tenendam facto protestatur et ostendit
quod propter generale concilium non vult suam
assertionem revocare. Hoc etiam verbo protestatur cum
in fine Bullae dicat nulli licere contraire diffinitis per
eum. Talia enim verba vel aequipollentia in fine
constitutionum papalium consueverunt poni et
subintelliguntur licet non ponantur. Ergo talis pertinax
et haereticus est censendus.

that he is not willing to be corrected by a general
council, to which it pertains nevertheless to correct
even the pope of heresy. Therefore he should be
considered pertinacious and heretical. The major
[premise] is obvious, the minor is clearly proved. For
since, as far as he can, by his statute he constrains all
christians - and consequently a general council since
only christians ought to be present in a general council
- to hold his assertion, he bears witness and shows by
deed that he is not willing to retract his assertion
because of a general council. He bears witness to this
by his word too, when he says at the end of a Bull that
no one is permitted to oppose matters defined by him,
for it is customary to put such words or their equivalent
at the end of papal statutes, and they are tacitly
understood even if they are not put there. Therefore
such a person should be considered pertinacious and
heretical.

Quarto sic: qui in aliqua assertione haereticali se
firmaverit ultimate pertinax et haereticus est censendus
quia talis irrevocabiliter assertionem affirmat
haereticam, et per consequens paratus corrigi non
existit; sed gerens se pro papa et solleniter assertionem
haereticam diffiniens esse tenendam, in eadem
assertione per ultimatam deliberationem se firmat.
Igitur pertinax et haereticus est censendus.

[It is proved] fourth as follows. [See Significant
Variants, para. 26.] Whoever has finally confirmed his
[adherence to] some heretical assertion should be
considered pertinacious and heretical because such a
person is affirming the heretical assertion irrevocably
and, consequently, is not ready to be corrected; but in
presenting himself as pope and solemnly pronouncing
that a heretical assertion should be held, he affirms by
this final decree his [adherence] to that assertion.
Therefore he should be considered pertinacious and
heretical.

Quinto sic: qui nimis in errore persistit est pertinax; sed
talis nimis in errore persistit quia ad diffiniendum
errorem esse tenendum nullus potest absque temeritate
procedere. Ergo talis pertinax et haereticus est
censendus.

[It is proved] fifth as follows. He who persists too
much in an error is pertinacious; but such a person
persists too much in an error because no one can
proceed to pronounce that an error should be held
without being rash; therefore such a person should be
considered pertinacious and heretical.

CAPITULUM 33.

Chapter 33.

Discipulus Tracta
convincendi.

alium

modum

de

pertinacia Student Discuss another way of convicting someone of
pertinacity.

Magister Decimooctavo de pertinacia et haeretica
pravitate potest quis convinci si tali diffinitioni papae
consentit consulendo, cooperando, inducendo vel
diffiniendum esse taliter asserendo. Hoc tali ratione
probatur: facientes et consentientes consimili crimine
involvuntur, sicut et eos par poena constringit
secundum quod sacri canones asserunt manifeste; sed
papa taliter diffiniens assertionem hereticam pro
catholica esse tenendam pertinax et hereticus est
censendus; ergo et omnes consentientes eidem sunt
162

Master Someone can be convicted of pertinacity and
heretical wickedness in an eighteenth way if he agrees
with such a definition by the pope, by advising, urging,
inducing or asserting that it should be defined in that
way. This is proved by the following argument: those
acting and those agreeing [with them] are involved in a
similar charge, just as an equal punishment also binds
them, as the sacred canons clearly affirm. But a pope
who offers a definition such that a heretical assertion
should be held as catholic should be considered

