tamen a sapientibus est maxime in hoc casu consilium of counsellers there is safety". [Proverbs 24:6] And
requirendum, nec aliquis de sapientia propria tanquam although the counsels of the lesser are frequently not to
sit sufficiens quoquo modo confidat. Si enim mille be despised, it remains that in such an enterprise it is
carentes potentia temporali, quorum quilibet sapientiam above all the counsel of the wise which must be sought,
Salomonis excederet, papam hereticum regum et nor should one in any way be confident of the
principum favore fulcitum satagerent impugnare, sufficiency of one's own wisdom. For if a thousand
aliorum consilio indigerent. Nec tamen propter hoc individuals not endowed with temporal power, each of
pauciores et minus sapientes debent aliqualiter whom exceeded the wisdom of Solomon, were to
formidare contra papam hereticum bellum accipere. oppose a heretic pope who was strengthened by the
Quia quamvis nichil de contingentibus obmittere favour of kings and princes, they would need the
debeant, in sua tamen sapientia vel virtute sperare non counsel of others. Yet for all that, the fewer in number
debent, sed in virtute Dei, qui, si certaverint usque ad and the less wise must not fear in any way to undertake
mortem, expugnabit pro eis inimicos eorum. a war against a heretic pope. For although they must not
Quamobrem nullam multitudinem adherentium pape omit any of the relevant preparations, neither must they
heretico expavescant, quia sicut allegatum est supra, place exclusive expectation on their own wisdom and
teste Iuda Machabeo: "non est differentia in conspectu virtue, but rather on the virtue of God, who will defeat
Dei celi liberare in multis et in paucis". Et Exodi 23 their enemies on their behalf if they fight unto death.
unicuique fideli in hec verba mandatur: "non sequeris For that reason they should not fear the multitude of the
turbam ad faciendum malum, nec in iudicio plurimorum heretic pope's supporters, because, as earlier argued, [1
acquiesces sententie ut a vero devies". Cuius rationem Dial. 7.47] witness Judah Maccabee: "with the God of
assignat Psalmista dicens: "defecit sanctus quoniam heaven it is all one, to deliver with a great multitude, or
diminute sunt veritates a filiis hominum, vana locuti sunt a small company". [1 Maccabees 3:18] And in Exodus
unusquisque ad proximum". Et alibi ait: "omnes 23 a command is issued to every believer in these
declinaverunt simul, inutiles facti sunt. Non est qui words: "thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil;
faciat bonum non est usque unum". Rationem etiam neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many
eiusdem assignat Salomon Ecclesiasti 1 dicens: to wrest judgement". [Exodus 23:2] And the reason for
"stultorum infinitus est numerus". Nec Isaias rationem this is laid down by the Psalmist, who states: "for the
eius tacuit cum dixit: "omne caput languidum et omne godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the
cor merens a planta pedis usque ad verticem non est in children of men. They speak vanity every one with his
eo sanitas". Imo etiam Salvator ipse rationem dicti neighbour". [Psalms 12:1-2] And elsewhere he states:
prioris expressit cum dicit Matthei 7: "Lata porta et "they are all gone aside, they are all together become
spaciosa via que ducit ad perditionem et multi sunt qui filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one".
intrant per eam quam angusta porta et arta via que ducit [Psalms 14:3] The reason for this is also laid down by
ad vitam et pauci sunt qui inveniunt eam". Et alibi ait: Solomon, who states in Ecclesiastes 1: "the foolish are
"multi autem sunt vocati, pauci vero electi". Ex quibus infinite in number". [Ecclesiastes 1:15] Nor did Isaiah
aliisque innumeris nonnulli accipiunt argumenta ad mute this reason when he stated: "the whole head is
probandum quod propter quantamcunque multitudinem sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot
adherentium pape heretico non debent pavere paucissimi even unto the head is no soundness in it". [Isaiah 1:5-6]
contra papam hereticum patenter insurgere. Ante omnia Indeed, the Saviour himself expresses the reason of the
tamen ab omni peccato mortali se servare conantur, quia prior statement when he says in Matthew 7: "wide is the
sicut non est speciosa laus in ore peccatorum ita gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction,
defensio fidei vel impugnatio pravitatis heretice per and many there be which go in thereat; because strait is
scelestum coram Deo est minime preciosa, licet utilis the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life,
aliis esse possit. Oportet igitur impugnatorem idoneum and few there be that find it". [Matthew 7:13-14] And
pape heretici non solum peccata carnalia sed etiam elsewhere he states: "for many are called, but few are
spiritualia declinare. Propter quod nonnulli putant quod chosen". [Matthew 22:14] From these texts, and from
hiis diebus essent paucissimi impugnatores idonei pape innumerable others, many derive arguments to prove
heretici, quia fere totum mundum, tam clericos quam that the very few must not fear to rise up openly against
laicos, tam seculares quam religiosos, dubitant peccatis a heretic pope, no matter what multitude of supporters
mortalibus spiritualibus, fornicatione et furto peioribus, he possesses. But above all, opponents of a heretic pope
esse enormiter irretitos, ut ambigant non minus modo must preserve themselves from any mortal sin, because,
quam tempore Noe verificari illud Genesis 6: "corrupta just as praise in the mouth of sinners is not impressive,
est autem terra coram Deo, et repleta est iniquitate".
likewise is the defense of the faith or the assault on
heretical wickedness made by a criminal of no value
before God, though it might be useful to others. It is
therefore appropriate for the qualified opponent of a
heretic pope to avoid not only physical but also spiritual
sins. And this is why many believe that in our times
there would be exceedingly few qualified opponents of
488

