veritatis humanum impediant, ymmo pervertant, pervert, human judgement in its search for truth, your
iudicium, si sententiam tuam et etiam nomen occultare friends will not embrace this future work more than they
volueris, nec amici opus futurum plus quam debeant should nor your enemies disdain it more than is
amplectentur , nec plus quam oporteat despicient reasonable, if you choose to hide your own opinion and
inimici, sed hii et illi, non quis alicuius sententie fuerit even your name, but both parties, attending not to who
auctor , sed quid dicitur attendentes, rectioribus oculis was the author of an opinion but to what is said, will see
scribenda respicient et insistent sincerius indagini what is to be written with more honest eyes and more
veritatis .
sincerely seek the truth.
Propter quam etiam rationem in hoc opere quid de For the same reason too would you not reveal in this
domino summo pontifice ac doctrina eius suisque emulis work what you think about the lord, the highest pontiff,
sentias nequaquam aperias. Quod ut magis abscondas, and his teaching and his rivals? So that you hide this the
cum de personis loqueris eorum nomina supprimas better, when you speak about persons would you
officiorum et primis litteris nominum propriorum suppress the names of their offices and refer to them by
appella . Unde dominum papam dominum "I ", Bavarum the first letter of their proper name. Take care, therefore,
dominum "L ", Fratrem Michaelem , Generalem to call the lord pope Lord "J", the lord of the Bavarians
Fratrum Minorum, fratrem "M" , Fratrem Giraldum "L" , brother Michael, general of the friars minor,
Othonis Fratrem "G " cura vocare.
Brother "M", and Guiral Ot, , Brother "G".
A te autem specialiter hoc opus efflagito non solum quia I earnestly request this work from you specifically not
te reputo pre aliis eruditum, sed etiam quia te video circa only because I regard you as learned beyond others but
contingentia controversiam prefatam singulariter also because I see that you are particularly occupied
occupatum. Omnes enim libellos et opera adversariorum with events touching on this controversy. For you strive
contra dominum summum pontificem niteris to bring together all the books and works against our
congregare, in quibus sine intermissione studes, ita ut lord highest pontiff by his opponents and you so busy
aliquando occasionem habeam suspicandi quod aliqua yourself with them without pausing that I sometimes
dubitatio in corde tuo de summo pontifice eiusque have occasion to suspect that some doubt arises in your
doctrina nascatur. Quia tamen a me ---quem scis own heart about the highest pontiff and his teaching. Yet
eiusdem domini summi pontificis sincerissimum because you hide nothing of this from me, whom you
zelatorem, et quod adversarios complicesque eorum know to be a most sincere and zealous supporter of the
valde detestor ---de predictis nichil abscondis, michi same lord highest pontiff, and a keen abominator of his
prebes materiam opinandi quod ad reprobandum opponents and their collaborators, you give me reason to
tempore opportuno omnia opera colligis emulorum. think that you are collecting them in order to disprove at
Verumtamen propter motiva prescripta ante huius operis an opportune time all the works of his enemies.
consummationem michi mentem tuam minime pandas, Nevertheless, for the above reasons do not reveal your
nec propter hoc putes te culpam aliquam incursurum, mind to me before the conclusion of this work, and do
quia ut melius nosti nonnumquam licet veritatem ex not think that you will incur any blame for this, because,
causa tacere .
as you well know, it is sometimes permitted, for a
reason, to be silent about the truth .
Tractatum igitur primum de hereticis acceleres inchoare. Would you hasten, therefore, to begin the first tractate
Quem in septem divide libros, quorum primus investiget about heretics? Divide it into seven books. Let the first
ad quos, theologos videlicet vel canonistas, pertinet investigate to whom, that is theologians or canonists, it
principaliter diffinire que assertiones catholice, que chiefly belongs to define which assertions should be
heretice, qui etiam heretici et qui catholici, debeant regarded as catholic and which as heretical, and also
reputari. Secundus inquirat que assertiones heretice, que who should be regarded as heretics and who as
catholice, sunt censende.Tertius principaliter consideret catholics. Let the second ask which assertions should be
quis errans est inter hereticos computandus. Quartus considered heretical and which catholic. Let the third
quomodo de pertinacia et pravitate heretica debeat quis chiefly consider who of those who err should be counted
convinci. Quintus qui possunt pravitate heretica among heretics, the fourth how anyone ought to be
maculari. Sextus agat de punitione hereticorum et convicted of pertinacity and heretical wickedness, and
maxime pape si efficiatur hereticus. Septimus tractet de the fifth who can be stained with heretical wickedness.
credentibus, fautoribus, defensoribus, et receptatoribus Let the sixth deal with the punishment of heretics, and
hereticorum.
especially of the pope if he becomes a heretic. Let the
seventh treat the believers, favourers, defenders and
harbourers of heretics.
Magister: AFFECTAS UT VIDEO quatenus ex serie Master: YOU DESIRE, I see, that from the wording of
dicendorum nemo possit colligere quam partem what is to be said no one should be able to gather which
dissentientium circa catholicam fidem reputem party of those disagreeing about the catholic faith I
iustiorem, quod tue satisfaciens voluntati, una cum aliis regard as the more correct. I will take care to observe
que efflagitas , servare curabo. Porro cum opus futurum this and to satisfy this wish of yours and others that you
per interrogationem et responsionem fieri roges, earnestly request. Moreover , since you ask that this
2

