faciendo vel loquendo. Quantum ad primum dicunt secondly, in the context of someone providing
quod si aliquis occasionem dampni dat solummodo opportunity for a loss by doing or saying something. As
aliquid omittendo, aut tenetur illud facere, et tunc ex tali to the first, they say that if someone gives opportunity
omissione tenetur et culpam incurrit. Hinc in Exodo for a loss merely by not doing something, one possibility
legitur, et recitatur Extra, De iniuriis et dampno dato, c. is that he was bound to do what he omitted to do, and in
Si bos : "si bos alienus cornupeta esset ab heri et that event heis bound and incurs blame for such an
nudiustertius, et non custodivit eum dominus suus, omission. Hence one reads in Exodus [21:36], and this is
reddet bovem pro bove", ubi dicit glossa super verbum recited in Extra, De iniuriis et dampno dato, c. Si bos: "if
'non custodivit': "supple, et alterius bovem occiderit, it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past,
unde tenetur, quia culpa sive negligentia ipsius and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay
dampnum datum est, qui debuit diligentiam adhibere". ox for ox". [cols. 878-9] Here the gloss comments thus
Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod ideo dominus on the words "hath not kept him in": "add, and he killed
bovis non custodiendo tenetur si bos suus dampnum the ox of another, and is bound on that account, because
fecerit, quia debuit diligentiam adhibere ex quo scivit the loss was incurred through the fault or negligence of
bovem suum cornupetam. Si autem aliquis dat him who was obligated to demonstrate care". [col. 1852]
occasionem dampni solummodo aliquid omittendo, si From these words we are given to understand that the
non tenebatur facere quod omisit, qualecunque reason why the owner of the ox whom he has not kept in
dampnum acciderit ex occasione data, ille qui is bound if his ox causes a loss, is because he had the
occasionem dampni dedit est immunis a culpa. Quod duty to demonstrate care since he knew that his ox used
Exodi 21 lex divina insinuare videtur, ubi sic legitur: "si to push in time past. But if someone provides
bos cornu petierit virum aut mulierem, et mortui fuerint, opportunity for a loss merely by not doing something, if
lapidibus obruetur et non comedentur carnes eius he was not bound to do what he omitted to do, then
dominusque bovis innocens erit, quod si bos cornupeta whatever loss resulted from the provided opportunity, he
fuerit ab heri et nudius tertius et contestati sunt who provided the opportunity would be exempt from
dominum eius nec reclusit eum, occideritque virum aut fault. This is what divine law suggests in Exodus 21[:28mulierem, et bos lapidibus obruetur et dominum illius 29] , where we read as follows: "if an ox gore a man or a
occident". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod si ex woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned,
non reclusione bovis quando dominus ipsum recludere and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox
non tenetur mors viri vel mulieris accidit, domino non shall be quit. But if the ox were wont to push with his
recludenti minime imputatur. Et ita qui occasionem horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner,
dampni dat aliquid omittendo quod facere non tenetur and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man
culpabilis minime iudicatur.
or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner shall
also be put to death". From these words we are given to
understand that if the death of a man or a woman results
from the fact than an ox has not been kept in when its
owner is not obligated to keep him in, then the owner
who has not kept his ox in is not blamed for the accident.
And thus he who provides opportunity for a loss by
omitting to do something which he was not obligated to
do is not judged to be accountable.
Secundo dicunt quod si quis dat occasionem dampni Secondly, they say that if someone provides opportunity
aliquid faciendo, aut dat operam rei licite aut rei illicite. for a loss by doing something, either he does something
Si rei illicite, omne dampnum quod sequitur ei which is permitted, or he does something which is not
imputatur. Si dat operam rei licite aut adhibet permitted. If he does something which is permitted or
diligentiam quam debet, et sibi nullum dampnum quod demonstrates due care, then no ensuing loss will be
sequitur imputatur. Aut non adhibet diligentiam debitam blamed on him. But if he does not demonstrate due care,
et tunc dampnum quod sequitur ei imputatur.
then a resulting loss will be blamed on him.
Discipulus: Ista valde rationabilia michi videntur, sed Student: These comments appear quite reasonable to
non video quomodo ad propositum debeant applicari. me, but I do not see how they must be applied to the
issue we are discussing.
Magister: Nonnullis apparet quod demonstrative potest Master: It appears to some that one may demonstrate
ostendi quod impugnantes papam de heretica pravitate conclusively that opponents of the pope imputing
sunt a catholicis defendendi. Ut tamen ratio eorum heretical wickedness to him are to be defended by
magis appareat, probant primo istam conclusionem: catholics. But in order to show the truth of their
quod videlicet taliter impugnantes papam de heretica contention more evidently, they initially prove the
pravitate si queruntur vel ducuntur ad mortem sunt a following conclusion: namely, that these opponents who
morte corporali per catholicos, si valuerint, liberandi. Et impute heretical wickedness to the pope are to be
ex ista conclusione inferunt quod ab omni persecutione liberated by catholics able to do this if the opponents are
et periculo sunt a catholicis eruendi.
pursued or led to their death. And from this conclusion
363

