tenencium quod Romana ecclesia que est distincta a
congregacione fidelium sicut caput a corpore possit
contra fidem errare adducas in medium.

purpose and bring into the open the arguments of
those who maintain that the Roman church which is
distinct from the congregation of believers as a head
from a body can err against faith.

(B) That the Roman Church that is part of the wider church can err
Magister Ad probandum ecclesiam Romanam posse
errare nonnulli plures raciones adducunt. Quorundam
autem racio fundamentalis est quedam racio sepe tacta
superius ad asserciones alias ostendendas, que talis est.
Illud quod promittitur toti et nulli parti non debet alicui
parti attribui eciam principaliori. Sed numquam errare
contra fidem toti congregacioni fidelium promissum fuit
a Christo, et nulli parti fuit hoc promissum. Ergo non
debet hoc alicui particulari ecclesie catholicorum
attribui. Cum ergo ecclesia Romana sit pars ecclesie et
non sit tota ecclesia, non posse errare contra fidem non
est attribuendum Romane ecclesie.

Master: Some people bring forward many arguments
to prove that the Roman church can err. Their basic
argument, however, is an argument often touched on
above [chapters 7, 8] for showing other assertions,
and it runs as follows. That which is promised to a
whole and not to any part should not be attributed to
any part, even to the chief part. But Christ's promise
that it would never err against faith was made to the
whole congregation of believers, and not to any part
of it. This ought not be attributed, therefore, to any
particular church of catholics. Since the Roman
church is part of the church, therefore, and is not the
whole church an inability to err against faith chould
not be attributed to it.

Discipulus Nonne quando Christus dixit Petro, "Ego
pro te rogavi Petre ut non deficiat fides tua", promisit
ecclesie cuius Petrus futurus fuit caput quod numquam
fides sua deficeret?

Student: When Christ said to Peter [Luke 22:32], "I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not", did he
promise the church of which Peter would be the head
that its faith would never fail?

Magister Dicunt quod hoc dixit Christus Petro non in
persona alicuius ecclesie particularis sed pro ecclesia
universali. Cuius racionem assignant, dicentes quod
quando Christus dixit verba predicta Petro, Petrus non
magis fuit caput Romane ecclesie quam Anciochene,
sed tunc habiturus erat primo sedem in Anciochia et
postea in Roma. Cum ergo in verbis predictis non plus
fiat mencio de Roma quam de Anciochia non plus
intelligi debent de Roma quam de Anciochia, quia verba
generalia ad omnia particularia eque se habent. Sed
verba predicta non debent intelligi de Anciochia, quia
fides illius ecclesie iam defecit, ergo nec de Romana
ecclesia debent intelligi.

Master: They say that Christ said this to Peter not in
the character of any particular church but on behalf
of the universal church. They provide an argument
for this by saying that when Christ said the above
words to Peter, Peter was no more head of the Roman
church than he was of the church at Antioch, and that
at the time he was going to have his see first at
Antioch and later in Rome. Since there is no more
mention of Rome than of Antioch in the above
words, therefore, they should not be understood of
Rome any more than of Antioch, because general
terms apply equally to all particulars; but the above
words should not be understood of Antioch, because
the faith of that church has already failed, and so,
therefore they should not be understood of the
Roman church.

Discipulus Quomodo dicunt quod fides Anciochene
ecclesie defecit cum adhuc sit patriarcha Anciochenus
qui potest vocari ecclesia Anciochena?

Student: How can they say that the faith of the
church of Antioch has failed when there is still a
patriarch of Antioch who can be called the church of
Antioch?

Magister Quod sit aliquis patriarcha Anciochenus non
est ex promissione Christi sed ex voluntaria ordinacione
summi pontificis qui creat patriarcham talem, licet
ecclesia Anciochena defecerit; et sepe accidit quod
nullus est patriarcha Anciochenus.

Master: That there may be some patriarch of Antioch
is not due to Christ's promise but to a voluntary
arrangement by the highest pontiff who creates such
a patriarch even if the church of Antioch has failed;
and it often happens that there is no patriarch of
Antioch.

223

