believers.
Discipulus De hoc postea tecum collocucionem
habebo; ideo transi ad alias raciones.

Student: I will have a conversation about this with
you later, so would you pass on to other arguments.

Magister Quinto sic arguitur. Constitutus in dignitate
que habenti confert innocencie sanctitatem hereticari
non potest; sed papatus confert pape innocencie
sanctitatem, teste Symacho papa qui, ut habetur dist.
40, c. Non nos ait, "Quis sanctum dubitet esse quem
apex tante dignitatis attollit? In quo, si desint bona
acquisita per meritum, sufficiunt que a loci
predecessore testantur; aut enim claros ad hec fastigia
erigit aut qui eriguntur illustrat" Ex hiis verbis
colligitur quod quem dignitas papatus attollit, eciam si
malus prius extiterit, sanctitate illustrat. Quare nisi
renunciaverit papatui hereticari non potest.

Master: A fifth argument is as follows. Someone
appointed to a dignity which confers the sanctity of
innocence on the one holding it can not become a
heretic. But the papacy confers the sanctity of
innocence on the pope, as Pope Symachus attests. As
we find in dist. 40, c. Non nos [col.145], he says,
"Who will doubt that he whom the crown of so great a
dignity raises up is holy? If he lacks any good which
is acquired by merit, that which was shown by his
predecessor in the position suffices. For it either raises
the famous to these heights or it makes shine those
who are raised." We gather from these words that him
whom the dignity of the papacy raises up it makes
shine with holiness even if he were bad before. So he
can not become a heretic unless he renounces the
papacy.

Sexto sic: si papa contra fidem posset errare et heretica
infici pravitate, eadem racione et multo forcius quilibet
Christianus poterit heresi dampnari. Ubi autem quilibet
de collegio aliquo potest hereticari, eciam totum
collegium hereticari valebit. Quare sequeretur quod
tota congregacio Christianorum posset hereticam
incurrere pravitatem, quod doctrine evangelice
adversatur aperte.

[It is argued] sixth as follows. If a pope could err
against the faith and be infected with heretical
wickedness, by the same argument and more
convincingly can any Christian at all be condemned
for heresy. But when anyone at all from some college
can become a heretic the whole college too will be
capable of becoming heretical. From this it would
follow that the whole congregation of Christians could
incur heretical wickedness. This is clearly opposed to
gospel teaching.

Septimo sic: qui potest errare contra fidem potest
contra divina precepta aliquid imperare; ei autem qui
potest contra divina precepta iubere aliquid non est
necesse in omnibus obedire, quia, secundum
sentenciam beati Petri Actuum 5, pocius obediendum
est Deo quam contra Deum iubenti. Si ergo papa potest
contra fidem errare non est necesse pape in omnibus
obedire, quod sacris canonibus obviare videtur.
Gregorius enim, ut habetur dist. 19, c. Nulli, ait, "Nulli
fas est vel velle vel posse transgredi apostolice sedis
precepta"; et idem Gregorius, ut habetur dist. 12, c.
Preceptis, ait, "Preceptis apostolicis non dura superbia
resistatur sed per obedienciam que a sancta Romana
ecclesia et apostolica auctoritate iussa sunt salutifere
impleantur." Ex hiis patet quod preceptis pape est in
omnibus obediendum; et per consequens errare non
potest.

A seventh [argument is] as follows. Whoever can err
against faith can command something against divine
precepts. It is not necessary, however, to obey in all
matters him who can order something against divine
precepts because, in accord with blessed Peter's
opinion in Acts 5[:29], we should obey God rather
than someone ordering something against God. So if a
pope can err against faith it is not necessary to obey
the pope in all matters. But this seems to oppose the
sacred canons for, as we find in dist. 19, c. Nulli
[col.61], Gregory says, "It is not lawful for anyone to
want or be able to transgress the precepts of the
apostolic see." As we find in dist. 12, c. Preceptis
[col.27], the same Gregory also says, "Let not the
apostolic precepts be resisted with obstinate pride but
let those things which have been commanded by the
holy Roman church and its apostolic authority be
discharged in a healing way.' It is clear from these that
the precepts of a pope should be obeyed in all matters;
and as a consequence he can not err.

Octavo sic: si papa posset hereticari, posset ab homine
iudicari; sed papa non potest ab homine iudicari, sicut
sacri canones attestantur; ergo papa hereticari non

An eighth [argument is] as follows. If a pope could
become a heretic he could be judged by man; but a
pope can not be judged by man, as the sacred canons

184

