pape que aliis illicita dinoscuntur. Et ideo de talibus, si permitted to the pope which are known to be forbidden
faciat ea papa, non licet iudicare quod papa malefaciat, to others. And therefore if the pope were to do such
de aliis tamen hoc licet. Propter quod, quia sunt aliqua things, it would not be permitted to judge that he is
que sunt illicita pape que tamen aliis licent, de talibus doing wrong, while it would be permissible to make
licet iudicare quod papa peccat, sed de aliis hoc minime such a judgement with respect to others. On the other
licet.
hand, because there are matters which are forbidden to
the pope while allowed to others, it is permitted with
respect to such matters to judge that the pope is sinning,
but it is not permitted to make such a judgement of other
people.
Discipulus: Videtur quod isti parum reputant de persona Student: It seems that these theorists have little regard
pape, licet forte de officio pape multum estiment.
for the person of the pope, although perhaps they think
highly of the papal office.
Magister: Isti reputant papam hominem mortalem, Master: They believe the pope to be a mortal man,
peccabilem, innumeris periculis spiritualibus expositum. capable of committing sins, and exposed to countless
Multos autem summos pontifices qui fuerunt, reputant spiritual dangers. They further believe that many
fuisse viros sceleratissimos, omni confusione dignos, et supreme pontiffs of past ages were the most heinously
quod hoc licet asserere et sentire, et ita de quolibet criminal of men, worthy of every retribution. They think
summo pontifice licet hoc sentire in speciali, quandoque that it is permitted to state this fact, and to feel it, and
facit aliquid (et constat eum posse facere) quod bono thus that one is allowed to feel this reaction specifically
animo nequaquam facere potest. Unde assertionem qua concerning any pope, whenever he does anything (and it
dicitur quod debemus reputare bene factum quicquid stands to reason that he is capable of doing this) which
fecerit, heresim perniciosissimam et periculosissimam can in no way be done with a good conscience. Hence
arbitrantur.
they consider the contention stating that we must
believe well done whatever the pope has done to be a
heresy most pernicious and most dangerous.
Discipulus: Suntne alique alie estimationes false et Student: Are there any other false and erroneous
erronee que facerent multos pape heretico adherere.
convictions which would influence many to join the
camp of the heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod sic. Putant enim quidam Master: The answer is affirmative. Some, for instance,
quod cohertio pape heretici spectat solummodo ad think that the forcible suppression of a heretic pope
concilium generale. Quidam autem putant quod cohertio pertains only to a general council. Others, however,
pape heretici spectat solummodo ad clericos et nullo believe that the forcible suppression of a heretic pope
modo ad laicos, nisi fuerint per prelatos ecclesie pertains only to clerks, and in no way to laymen, unless
requisiti. Quidam vero putant quod cohertio, et similiter they were requested to do this by prelates of the church.
vitatio pape heretici solummodo spectat ad cardinales. And some think that suppression (and similarly
Quidam putant quod solummodo spectat ad maiores avoidance) of the heretic pope is strictly the affair of
prelatos ecclesie, puta ad patriarchas et episcopos. cardinals. Some think that this only pertains to the major
Quidam putant quod simplices et laici de spiritualibus prelates of the church, such as patriarchs and bishops.
nichil facere debent, nisi quod fuerit eis per episcopos Some think that the unlearned and the laymen must do
suos iniunctum. Et ideo de papa heretico se intromittere nothing about spiritual matters except what they have
non debent, nisi quod eis preceperint episcopi been enjoined to do by their bishops, and therefore they
eorundem. Quidam putant quod quamdiu papa hereticus must not become involved in the matter of a heretic
toleratur a multitudine christianorum nullus debet eum pope except to follow the instructions given to them by
aliqualiter impugnare. Quidam putant quod multitudo est their bishops. Some believe that no one should in any
in omnibus sequenda, et ideo ille pro papa est habendus fashion oppose a heretic pope so long as he is tolerated
quem multitudo christianorum habet pro papa. Ex hiis by the multitude of Christians. Some believe that the
omnibus estimationibus et qualibet illarum, aliisque multitude is to be followed in all things, and therefore
quam pluribus estimationibus falsis et erroneis, accideret he is to be recognized as pope whom the multitude of
quod si papa fieret hereticus quamplures ei firmiter Christians holds to be so. From all of these convictions,
adhererent.
and from any one of them in particular, as well as from
other most numerous false and erroneous convictions, it
might well happen that if a pope were to become a
heretic, very many would firmly place themselves in his
camp.
Discipulus: Dixisti unam causam divisam in plures ex Student: You have stated one cause, divided into
qua accideret quod si papa efficeretur hereticus particulars, wherefore it might happen that were a pope
christiani plures adhererent eidem. Ideo nunc dic alias to become a heretic, many Christians would join his
causas ex quibus idem accideret.
camp. Proceed, therefore, to mention other causes which
481

