et in multis aliis sacris canonibus hoc idem habetur. having recourse to the remedy of an appeal is most
Ergo appellatione est utendum ad relevandum intense, and thus it is necessary to appeal from such a
oppressos. Sed catholici maxime opprimuntur si papa judgement. The third argument is this. Each thing must
sententiat fidem christianam esse falsam. Ergo in hoc be used for the purpose for which it is known to have
casu est precipue utendum appellationis remedio. Ergo a been instituted. But the appeal process has been
tali sententia est necessarium appellare.
instituted so that the oppressed may be relieved (2 q. 6 c.
Omnis [col.467] and c. Ideo, [col. 471] and the same
notion is expressed in many other sacred canons).
Therefore one must utilize the appeal process for the
purpose of relieving the oppressed. But catholics are
maximally oppressed if the pope decrees that the
Christian faith is false. Therefore in this case above all
must one utilize the remedy of an appeal. Therefore it is
necessary to appeal from such a judgement.
Capitulum 29
Chapter 29
Discipulus: Tam rationes quibus ostenditur quod non Student: Both the reasons by which one shows that it is
est necesse appellare a sententia pape diffinitive not necessary to appeal from the judgement of a pope
pronuntiantis fidem christianam esse falsam, quam who definitively proclaims the Christian faith to be false,
rationes pro assertione contraria allegate apparentes and the reasons advanced in favour of the contrary
michi videntur. Ideo peto ut referas quomodo assertion, seem apparent to me. Therefore I ask you to
respondetur ad utrasque. Primo autem respondeas ad outline how both sets of arguments are to be answered.
rationes probantes quod non est necesse appellare.
But respond first of all to the reasons proving that it is
not necessary to appeal.
Magister: Ad primam istarum dicitur quod non est Master: To the first of these the reply is that it is not
necesse appellare a sententia lata contra leges et canones necessary to appeal from a sentence rendered against
quia hoc est cautum in iure. Non est autem cautum in human laws and canons because this is provided for in
iure quod non est necesse appellare a sententia pape law. But it is not provided in the law that it is not
pronuntiantis legem christianam esse falsam. Ad necessary to appeal from the sentence of a pope
secundam dicitur quod sententiarum que non possunt proclaiming the Christian law to be false. To the second
transire in rem iudicatam duplex differentia reperitur. the reply is that one finds two different types of
Quedam enim est sententia talis a qua si non appellat judgements that cannot become legally conclusive. One
ille contra quem fuerit lata eo ipso ipsi parere censetur. is such that if the person against whom the sentence is
Talis est sententia lata contra fidem, et ideo a tali rendered does not appeal from it he would be thought by
sententia est necesse appellare ne is contra quem fertur the very fact of his inaction to have obediently accepted
fautor pravitatis heretice reputetur. Alia est sententia it. A sentence rendered against the faith is of this type,
que transire non potest in rem iudicatam, cui tamen ille and therefore it is necessary to appeal from this
contra quem fertur non censetur parere licet non judgement lest the one against whom it is rendered be
appellet, et a tali sententia non est necesse appellare et considered an aider and abettor of heretical wickedness.
de tali est sermo in decretis 2 q. 6 par. Diffinitiva. Ad Another type of sentence that cannot become legally
tertiam consimiliter respondetur quod in illa causa conclusive is the one that the person against whom it is
contra quam non potest prescriptio currere cui si ille rendered is not thought to be obeying even if he does not
contra quem fertur non censetur parere licet non appeal. From such a sentence it is not necessary to
appellet, non est necesse appellare, et talis non est causa appeal, and that is the type of sentence which is
fidei. Ideo si feratur iniqua sententia contra fidem discussed in the canon law at 2 q. 6 # Diffinitiva. [col.
necesse est appellare ne non appellans favere heresi 481] A similar reply is given to the third reason. It is not
iudicetur. Ad quartam respondetur quod causa fidei est necessary to appeal in a cause against which prescription
magis privilegiata quam causa matrimonii, quia causam cannot run if the person against whom sentence is
fidei debet quilibet contra quem lata est pro viribus rendered is not thought to obey the sentence even if he
defensare, ideo ad defensionem fidei appellare tenetur. does not appeal from it. But such is not the cause of
Non sic autem tenetur quilibet defendere causam faith. Therefore if an unjust sentence is rendered against
matrimonii, et ideo non semper est necesse appellare. Et the faith it is necessary to appeal lest the person who
per hoc patet responsio ad quintam rationem.
does not appeal be judged to favour heresy. The answer
to the fourth reason is that the cause of faith is more
privileged than the cause of matrimony, because anyone
must defend with all his strength the cause of faith when
a legal decision has been rendered against him in this
connection, therefore he is bound to appeal for the
defense of the faith. Anyone is not bound to defend in
like manner the cause of matrimony, and therefore it is
320

