subiecti sui. Ergo quando dubitatur de aliquo an sit Therefore the prelate must know the identity of his
subiectus alicuius prelati idem prelatus astringitur, ne subjects. And so when there is doubt as to whether
forte subditus suus per negligentiam pereat et secum someone is the subject of a certain prelate, that prelate is
alios pertrahat in interitum, diligenter inquirere et bound to diligently inquire and to investigate whether
investigare an ad gregem suum pertineat. Sed si papa de the person belongs to his flock, so as to prevent his
heresi graviter diffamatus sit prelati debent probabiliter possible subject from perishing due to negligence and
dubitare an papa taliter diffamatus sit de iurisdictione dragging others into destruction along with himself. But
ipsorum effectus, quia dubitare habent an sit hereticus, if the pope is seriously defamed of heresy, prelates must
licet non statim debeant credere ipsum esse hereticum. have probable doubt whether such a slandered pope
Ergo in hoc casu tenentur inquirere an papa taliter might not have become subject to their jurisdiction, for
diffamatus sit de iurisdictione ipsorum. Hoc autem they must wonder if he is a heretic even if they must not
nequaquam facere possunt nisi inquirendo an sit immediately believe that he is a heretic. Therefore in this
effectus hereticus. Ergo tenentur inquirere an papa case they are bound to inquire whether a pope thus
taliter diffamatus hereticam incurrerit pravitatem.
slandered is under their jurisdiction. But this they cannot
do unless they inquire if he has become a heretic.
Therefore they are bound to inquire whether a pope
defamed in this way has lapsed into heretical
wickedness.
Secunda ratio est hec. Ad illum spectat scire qui sunt The second argument is this. One who is involved in the
subditi sui ad quem spectat corrigere omnium correction of all his subjects' deviations needs to know
subditorum suum excessus. Sed ad prelatos catholicos who his subjects are. But as the holy canons clearly
spectat corrigere omnium subditorum suorum excessus declare, it is the catholic prelates who are involved in the
ut sacri canones protestantur aperte. Ergo ad ipsos correction of all their subjects' deviations. Therefore it
spectat scire de omnibus qui sunt subditi sui. Ergo ad pertains to these prelates to know who are their specific
ipsos pertinet inquirere de illis de quibus dubitatur an subjects. It also pertains to such prelates to inquire
sint sibi subiecti utrum in rei veritate sint subditi sui vel whether those who have a doubtful status as their
non. Si autem papa de heresi graviter diffamatur, subjects are in truth their subjects or not. If, however, a
probabiliter dubitatur an sit subiectus catholicorum quia pope is seriously defamed of heresy, there is probable
probabiliter dubitatur an sit hereticus. Ergo ad doubt whether he is the subject of catholics because
catholicos pertinet inquirere an papa de heresi there is probable doubt whether he is a heretic.
diffamatus sit eis subiectus. Tertia ratio est hec. Prelati Therefore it pertains to catholics to inquire whether a
catholici tenentur ex officio suo oves suas contra pope defamed of heresy is subject to them. Here is the
luporum rabiem custodire. Ergo tenentur subditos suos third argument. Catholic prelates have an official
contra hereticorum insidias conservare, et per obligation to protect their sheep from the ferocity of
consequens quando nuntiatur prelatis catholicis per wolves. Therefore they are bound to preserve their
publicam famam quod aliquis nititur gregem suum subjects from the snares of heretics. Consequently when
invadere et corrumpere per hereticam pravitatem, public rumour advises catholic prelates that someone is
debent diligenter inquirere veritatem, ipso Domino attempting to invade their flock and corrupt it by
precipiente Deut. 13: "si audieris in una urbium tuarum heretical wickedness, they must scrupulously inquire
quas Dominus Deus tuus dabit tibi ad habitandum into the truth of this. The Lord Himself commands it in
dicentes aliquos egressi sunt filii Belial de medio tui et Deuteronomy 13[:12-15] : "If thou shalt hear say in one
averterunt habitatores urbis tue atque dixerunt 'eamus et of thy cities, which the Lord thy God hath given thee to
serviamus diis alienis' quos ignoratis quere sollicite et dwell there, saying, certain men, the children of Belial,
diligenter, rei veritate perspecta, si inveneris certum are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the
esse quod dicitur et abhominationem hanc opere inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve
perpetratam statim percuties habitatores urbis illius in other gods, which ye have not known; then shalt thou
ore gladii etc." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod si a enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and
providis et honestis papa vel quicunque alius publice behold, if it be true, and the thing certain, that such
diffamatur quod velit catholicos a fide avertere abomination is wrought among you; thou shalt surely
orthodoxa, est veritas diligenter inquirenda. Ergo de smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the
papa super crimine heresis graviter diffamato est sword, etc." From these words we understand that if the
inquisitio facienda.
pope or anyone else is publicly defamed by provident
and honourable men [saying] that he intends to alienate
catholics from orthodox faith, then the truth must be
diligently investigated. Therefore an inquisition about a
pope seriously defamed of the crime of heresy must take
place.
Discipulus: Prelati non habent inquirere nisi de illis Student: It is not the business of prelates to inquire
quos constat esse subditos suos, et ita de papa non about any except those who are their confirmed subjects,
294

