principaliter sic. Qui officium susceptum vel asking for the authoritative sanction of any mortal
commissum negligit exercere est merito arguendus. prelate. He who neglects to perform an assumed or
Talis enim servo nequam qui abscondit talentum sibi assigned official duty merits blame. Such a person may
commissum non immerito comparatur. Facit etiam deservedly be compared to the bad servant who conceals
contra preceptum Apostoli scribentis 2 ad Tim. 4: the funds entrusted to him [Matthew 25:26; Luke 19:22].
"ministerium tuum imple". Sed ad officium This person also contradicts the command of the Apostle
predicatorum et doctorum spectat veritatem catholicam writing in 2 Timothy 4: "make full proof of thy
affirmare, et pravitatem hereticam confutare, que duo ministry"[2 Timothy 4:5]. But it belongs to the office of
sunt opera sapientis, scilicet non mentiri de quibus preachers and doctors to confirm catholic truth and to
novit, et mentientem posse manifestare. Ergo ad refute heretical wickedness. These are surely the two
predicatores et doctores spectat perfidiam pape heretici qualities of the wise man: not to lie concerning what he
confutare.
knows, and to reveal the identity of a liar [Ockham,
Expositio super libros Elenchorum, I, 1. par.5, in OPh
III, 11, citing Aristotle]. Therefore it pertains to
preachers and doctors to reject the treachery of a heretic
pope.
Discipulus: Licet ad predicatores et doctores pertineat Student: Although it pertains to preachers and doctors to
pravitatem hereticam confutare, non tamen spectat ad refute heretical wickedness, it is surely not their business
ipsos omnem pravitatem hereticam confutare, quia to refute every single heretical wickedness since no one
nullus posset hoc facere. Ergo per hanc rationem would have the stamina for this. Therefore this argument
probari non potest quod ad eos spectat perfidiam pape cannot prove that it is their task to condemn the treachery
heretici reprobare.
of a heretic pope.
Magister: Hec responsio non sufficit ut videtur multis Master: It seems to many that this reply is unconvincing
quia, secundum beatum Gregorium, secundum for the following reason. According to blessed Gregory
qualitatem auditorum debet formari sermo doctorum, et the speech of doctors must conform to the quality of the
videtur accepisse a beato Petro qui, ut legitur 8 q. 1 c. audience [Moralia in Job, book 30, section 12 in PL 76
Oportet ait: "oportet eum qui docet et instruit animas col. 530], and it seems that he borrowed this idea from
rudes esse talem ut pro ingenio discentium semetipsum blessed Peter who states (we read this in 8 q. 1 c.
possit aptare et verbi ordinem pro audientis capacitate Oportet): "it is proper that he who teaches and instructs
dirigere". Sic oportet predicatorem et doctorem uncultured souls be able to adjust himself to the
secundum varietatem temporum doctrinam suam intelligence of the learners, and construct his verbal
audientibus ministrare ut quando ab hereticis de delivery according to the hearer's capacity"[col. 594]. In
aliquibus erroribus specialibus invaduntur, per similar fashion it is proper for the preacher and doctor to
doctrinam predicatorum et doctorum contra eosdem present his doctrine to listeners in conjunction with the
errores specialiter muniantur. Si ergo papa hereticus shifting requirements of the time, so that when heretics
virus sue perfidie in fideles laborat transfundere oportet putting forth certain specific errors assault these listeners,
predicatores et doctores sue perfidie specialiter obviare they might be specifically protected against those very
et de veritate contraria auditores salubriter informare. errors by the doctrine of preachers and doctors.
Therefore if a heretic pope exerts himself to transfer the
poison of his treachery unto believers, it is proper for
preachers and doctors to specifically oppose his
treachery and inform their audience with good effect of
the contrary truth.
Discipulus: Puto quod hanc rationem intelligo, ideo Student: I think that I understand this one, therefore do
alias non differas allegare.
not delay the presentation of other arguments.
Magister: Tertio principaliter videtur sic posse probari. Master: A third possible main argument appears to be
Ille cui ex officio incumbit peccanti resistere, si non this. He who is charged with the official duty of resisting
resistit peccanti, consentit, et simili modo cum eo the sinner consents to the latter's transgression if he fails
iudicandus est culpabilis. Hec est enim ratio quare sepe to perform this duty, and must be judged to share the
taciturnitas et dissimulatio imputantur prelatis que sinner's guilt. And this is the reason why silence and
tamen subditis minime imputantur, quia ad prelatos et dissimulation are frequently held as proof against
potestatem habentes spectat sepe peccantibus obviare, prelates and not against subjects, since it is frequently the
quod tamen ad subditos minime spectat. Sed duty of prelates and of such as wield power to move
predicatoribus et doctoribus ex officio suscepto against sinners, which is a task hardly pertaining to
incumbit perfidie pape heretici fidem corrumpere subjects. And it is surely the assumed official duty of
satagentis resistere. Ideo enim, ut dictum est, officium preachers and doctors to resist the treachery of a heretic
predicatoris et doctoris debent suscipere ut doceant pope attempting to corrupt the faith. And thus, as was
catholicam veritatem et confutent hereticam pravitatem. mentioned, preachers and doctors must assume their
Ergo si non resistunt pape heretico cum possunt, eius offices in order to teach catholic truth and refute heretical
437

