ponuntur 23 q. 4 cap. Ipsa pietas, que allegata sunt their physical salvation, a conviction evidently gathered
supra, colligitur evidenter. Sed si esset aliquis in populo from the words of blessed Augustine in 23 q. 4 c. Ipsa
qui, vallatus complicibus, eundem populum et omnem pietas, which were earlier advanced in argument. [cols.
alium catholicum corporaliter conaretur extinguere, 909-910. Cf. 1 Dial. 6.44, 50] But if there was someone
populus non deberet liberum abire dimittere, sed ne alios within the people who, with the help of accomplices,
populos christianos occideret, detinere. Ergo si papa were to attempt to physically exterminate this same
hereticus omnes catholicos spiritualiter per pravitatem people and every other catholic people, the people
hereticam conatur necare, populus cum quo moratur, would be obligated not to allow him to withdraw in
non solum proprio periculo sed etiam periculo aliorum freedom, but rather to detain him lest he slay the other
fidelium precavendo, ipsum detinere tenetur.
Christian peoples. Therefore, if a heretic pope is
attempting to spiritually destroy all catholics through
heretical wickedness, the populace with which he is
residing is obligated to detain him, not only to prevent
peril to itself, but also to prevent peril to the other
faithful.
Discipulus: Nunquid si populus permittit papam Student: If the populace allows the heretic pope to
hereticum libere secum commorari, et suos dogmatizare freely reside in its midst, and to propound his errors,
errores, debet receptator hereticorum censeri, si potest must it be considered a receiver of heretics, assuming
papam hereticum detinere.
that it has the power to detain the heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod sic. Quia ex quo spectat ad Master: The answer is affirmative. Since it is up to the
populum detinere papam hereticum quando dominus people to detain a heretic pope when the temporal lord
temporalis et prelati circa cohertionem pape heretici sunt and the prelates are culpably negligent with respect to
dampnabiliter negligentes, si populus eum non detinet the use of force against a heretic pope, if the populace
debet receptator pape heretici reputari.
does not detain him it must be considered to be a
receiver of the heretic pope.
Discipulus: Nunquid quilibet de populo tali debet dici Student: Must any member of such a people be called a
receptator pape heretici.
receiver of the heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod omnes qui dampnabiliter Master: The answer is that all those are receivers of the
negligunt papam hereticum detinere, vel qui tali heretic pope who are culpably negligent in the matter of
negligentie consentiunt, sunt receptatores pape heretici. his detention, or who consent to such negligence. If, on
Si vero sunt aliqui in populo qui ad detentionem pape the other hand, there are some members of the people
heretici alios exhortantur quantum licet eis pro gradu who, to the extent that their status allows, exhort others
suo, paratique essent una cum aliis papam hereticum to detain the heretic pope, and would be prepared to
detinere, aut talem exhortationem metu mortis vel collaborate with others in the matter of detaining the
gravium tormentorum omittunt, dolentes quod papa heretic pope, or if their omission of such exhortation is
hereticus minime detinetur, non sunt inter receptatores due to fear of death or of severe torments, and they
pape heretice computandi.
grieve at the fact that the heretic pope is not being
detained, then they are not to be numbered among the
receivers of the heretic pope.
Discipulus: Nunquid tales qui parati essent papam Student: Are those who would be prepared to detain the
hereticum detinere tenentur recedere, ne communicent heretic pope obligated to leave, so as not to
pape heretico.
communicate with the heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod si tales remanere in populo Master: The answer is that if, due to the power of the
minime possunt nisi communicent pape heretico propter heretic pope and of his supporters, such individuals
potentiam pape heretici et suorum, communicare could not remain members of the people unless they
possunt corporaliter pape heretico, scilicet loquendo, communicated with the heretic pope, they may
comedendo,
bibendo,
et
corporaliter
insimul physically communicate with him, namely, speak, eat,
conversando, nec ad vitandam talem communionem cum drink, and converse with him in mutual contact, and
notabili dampno suo tenentur recedere. Sed antequam they are not obligated to leave with deleterious effects to
communicent pape heretico aliter quam corporaliter themselves in order to avoid this kind of
tantum, puta in officio divino, vel in hiis que ad papatus communication. But they must withdraw from this
spectant officium, maxime quantum ad ea que ordinis territory sooner than communicate with the heretic pope
sunt, aut facto vel verbo protestando eum esse papam, otherwise than physically, for instance, by going to
debent de loco illo recedere, quia taliter communicare mass with him, or having dealings with him pertinent to
pape heretico nullus potest absque peccato mortali. the papal office, most of all as to issues relating to
Quilibet autem ante debet omnia mala tolerare quam spiritual order, or by acknowledging him to be pope by
peccare mortaliter.
word or deed; for no one may communicate with a
heretic pope in this manner without committing a mortal
sin, and everyone ought rather to undergo all possible
467

