[col.644]). The second part [of the minor premise] is
also proved because heresy is an ecclesiastical crime.
Therefore it pertains to the clergy alone to know
about the crime.
Discipulus De hac materia queram postea multa. Ideo
de ipsa pertranseas et aliud motivum ad assercionem
predictam inducas.

Student: I will ask you a lot about that matter later.
So would you pass it over and bring forward another
reason for that assertion.

Magister Tercium motivum eorum est tale. Tota
multitudo illorum non potest contra fidem errare qui
nullius iudicio extra illam multitudinem sunt subiecti,
quia si tota illa multitudo contra fidem erraret nullus
esset qui hereticos punire valeret. Sed clerici nullius
alterius quam clerici sunt subiecti iudicio, ut sacri
canones attestantur. Ergo tota multitudo clericorum
contra fidem errare non potest.

Master: Their third argument is as follows. The
whole multitude of those who are not subject to the
judgement of anyone outside that multitude can not
err against faith, because if the whole of that
multitude were to err against faith there would be no
one who was able to punish heretics. But, as the
sacred canons attest, the clergy are not subject to the
judgement of anyone else but the clergy. Therefore
the whole multitude of the clergy can not err against
faith.

Quartum motivum eorum est tale. Tota multitudo
illorum non potest contra fidem errare qui soli, et non
alii, potestatem caput ecclesie eligendi noscuntur
habere, quia numquam ecclesia ad statum illum
perveniet quin poterit sibi caput eligere, cum eciam
omnis congregacio possit sibi constituere caput. Sed
soli clerici, et non laici, habent potestatem eligendi
caput ecclesie, scilicet summum pontificem, iuxta
canonicas sancciones. Ergo tota multitudo clericorum
numquam contra fidem errabit.

Their fourth argument is as follows. The whole
multitude of those who are known to have alone -they and not others -- the power of choosing the head
of the church can not err against faith, because the
church will never come to that state in which it can
not choose a head for itself, since indeed every
congregation can appoint a head for itself. But
according to canonical decrees only the clergy, and
not the laity, have the power to choose the head of
the church, that is the highest pontiff. Therefore the
whole multitude of the clergy will never err against
faith.

Quintum motivum eorum est tale. Domus Dei que est
ecclesia militans non potest esse nulla, sicut nec
ecclesia potest esse nulla (24, q. 1, c. Pudenda). Sed
domus Dei que est ecclesia militans necessario
sacerdotes includit, quia necessario habet potestatem
ligandi atque solvendi, teste Hieronimo, qui, ut legitur
24, q. 1, c. Omnibus, ait, "Omnibus consideratis, puto
me non temere dicere alios ita esse in domo Dei ut ipsi
sint eadem domus Dei que dicitur edificari supra
petram, que unica columba appellatur." Et parum post,
"Que domus eciam claves accepit ac potestatem ligandi
atque solvendi." Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod domus
Dei que unica columba vocatur, quam constat esse
ecclesiam catholicam, claves habet atque potestatem
ligandi et solvendi. Claves autem et predicta potestas in
solis sacerdotibus inveniuntur. Ergo usque ad finem
seculi erunt in ecclesia catholica aliqui sacerdotes, et
per consequens tota multitudo clericorum numquam
contra fidem errabit.

[See Significant Variants, para. 39.]Their fifth reason
is as follows. The house of God which is the church
militant can not not exist, just as the church can not
not exist (24, q. 1, c. Pudenda [col.978]). But the
house of God which is the church militant necessarily
includes priests because it necessarily has the power
binding and loosing, as Jerome attests when he says,
as we read in 24, q. 1, c. Omnibus [col.973], "Having
taken everything into account I think that it is not
rash for me to say that others are in the house of God
in such a way that they are the very house of God
which is said to be built on the rock, which is called
the unique dove. ... This house also received the keys
and the power of binding and loosing." We gather
from these words that the house of God which is
called the unique dove -- and which it is certain is the
catholic church -- has the keys and the power of
binding and loosing. However the keys and that
power are found only in priests. Therefore there will
be some priests in the catholic church until the end of
the age, and, as a consequence, the whole multitude
of the clergy will never err against faith.

Sextum motivum est tale. Christus usque ad finem

A sixth reason is as follows. Until the end of the age

253

