a heretic pope, because these thinkers argue that
practically the entire world, clerks as much as laymen,
seculars as much as religious, are involved without
measure in the commission of spiritual mortals sins,
worse than fornication and theft, and these thinkers
believe that the following statement of Genesis 6 is
presently verified no less than it was in the time of
Noah: "the earth also was corrupt before God, and the
earth was filled with violence". [Genesis 6:11]
Capitulum 73
Chapter 73
Discipulus: De isto ultimo dicto vehementer admiror, Student: I am tremendously astonished by this last
cuius motiva in tractatu De gestis circa fidem statement, and shall diligently inquire about its motives
altercantium orthodoxam sollicite indagabo. Nunc in the treatise On the deeds of those disputing about
autem, cum plures prerogativas tetigeris quibus orthodox faith. Now, however, since you have touched
secundum quorundam sententiam oportet impugnatores on many prerogatives which, according to the opinion of
idoneos pape heretici preeminere, que omnes communes some, it is proper for qualified opponents of a heretic
impugnatoribus corporaliter et spiritualiter papam pope to possess in the highest degree, prerogatives all of
hereticum michi videntur, numera aliquas prerogativas which appear to me to be common to those who oppose
speciales quibus expedit preeminere impugnatores pape a heretic pope physically and spiritually, proceed to list
heretici, per testimonia scripturarum precipue, si papa certain particular prerogatives which should be present
hereticus errores coloratos et latentes conatus fuerit in the highest degree in those who oppose the pope
diffinitive populis tradere christianis.
specifically by relying on the witnesses of Scriptures, if
this heretic pope should definitively have attempted to
impart to Christian peoples errors both flagrant and
hidden.
Magister: Dicitur quod huiusmodi impugnatores Master: One responds that it is proper for such
idoneos pape heretici oportet sanctarum habere qualified opponents of a heretic pope to possess sound
intelligentiam scripturarum ut, scilicet, non solum knowledge of Scriptures, namely, so that they not only
memoriam verborum retineant, sed intellectum capiant remember their words, but also grasp the meaning of
veritatis. Quia, teste Hieronymo, ut legitur 1 q. 1 cap. their truth. Because, witness Jerome (as we read in 1 q.
Marcion: "nec putemus in verbis scripturarum esse 1 c. Marcion): "nor should we believe the Gospel to be
evangelium, sed in sensu; non in superficie, sed in found in the mere words of the Scriptures, but in their
medulla; non in sermonum foliis, sed in radice rationis". meaning; not on the surface, but in the marrow; not on
Multi enim quamvis memoria vigeant ut literas multas the written pages, but in the rational foundation". [col
retineant, et prompte que voluerint recitent et allegent, 381] For there are many individuals who, although
carent tamen iudicio et acumine rationis, unde ad verum endowed with sufficient memory to retain many of
intellectum, nisi forte aliquando casualiter, per seipsos Scripture's words, and able to instantly recite and argue
nesciant pervenire. Et de istis potest verificari illud these at will, nevertheless lack proper judgement and
Apostoli 2 Timotheo 3: "semper discentes et nunquam intellectual penetration as to these words' true meaning,
ad scientiam veritatis pervenientes". Tales autem non and do not know how to arrive at this by their own
sunt idonei ad impugnandum errores occultos et latentes. power, unless they manage it occasionally and by
Alii sunt vigentes rationis iudicio, quamvis in memoria accident. And it is of such interpreters that may be
deficere videantur, et illi, quamvis interdum cum magno verified the following comment of the Apostle in 2
labore et tarde, sunt idonei errores occultos et latentes ac Timothy 3: "ever learning, and never able to come to the
coloratos pape heretici impugnare. Quamvis enim sepe knowledge of the truth". [2 Timothy 3:7] Such persons
sint imperiti sermone ut eloquentia careant et ornatu are indeed not fitted to oppose errors both flagrant and
verborum, non tamen scientia, quia illi sciunt ex paucis hidden. There are others, however, endowed with
multa elicere, et illi perspicue vident que veritati sunt rational discernment, although they seem to lack
contraria, que consona, que antecedentia, que memory, and it is they who are qualified to oppose the
consequentia, que impertinentia sunt censenda. Qui secret, hidden, and flagrant errors of a heretic pope,
etiam per rationes sophisticas et auctoritates male even if it sometimes takes them much time and effort to
intellectas non de facili seducuntur. Per quam autem perform the task. Indeed, although they frequently are
scientiam rationis iudicium ad predicta potissime unskilled in qualities of speech, and lack eloquence and
adiuvetur libro nono De optimo genere addiscendi verbal flourish, they do not lack knowledge, for they
poteris invenire. Qui autem memoria et iudicio know how to deduce much from little, and it is they who
prepollent, quod raro accidit ut quidam estimant, et clearly see which claims are contrary to the truth and
essent in sacris literis eruditi, essent maxime idonei which are in harmony with it, which statements are to be
impugnatores errorum pape infecti heretica pravitate. considered the premises of an argument, which the
Oportet autem impugnatores idoneos pape heretici conclusions, and which are altogether irrelevant. These
489

