quod quia papa verus non habet superiorem ideo cum 6.25] Indeed it was stated that because a true pope has no
sententiat contra fidem non est necesse regulas superior, therefore in the event he lays down a
generales de appellationibus datas servare. Hoc enim judgement against the faith it is not necessary to observe
posset in periculum fidei redundare.
the general rules established with respect to appeals, for
this might result in danger for the faith.
Discipulus: Videtur quod regule date de appellationibus Student: It seems that the established rules as to appeals
strictius sunt servande cum quis vult a papa appellare should be observed more strictly when someone wants to
quam si vult ab alio appellare quia maior reverentia appeal from the pope than if he wants to appeal from
exhibenda est pape quam aliis inferioribus. Ergo regule somebody else, since a greater respect must be shown to
que possunt derogare honori pape strictissime sunt the pope than to others inferior to him. Therefore rules
servande eo quod nullus debet gaudere maiori privilegio which may lead (if the accusation is true) to an
quam papa.
infringement of papal honour should be observed most
strictly, in that no one must enjoy a greater privilege here
than the pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod leges canonice et civiles Master: The answer to this is that canon and civil laws
secundum
diversitates
causarum,
personarum, are to be more or less strictly observed or not observed at
temporum et periculi quod imminet ac etiam circa alias all depending on the variety of causes, persons, and
circumstantias sunt magis stricte vel minus stricte times, on the imminent danger, and also on other
servande vel penitus non servande, et ideo quia papa circumstances. And therefore since a pope who renders a
ferens sententiam contra fidem gravius peccat quam sentence against the faith sins more seriously than
alius, quia peccatum ex dignitate augetur, facilius est another (because the sin grows with the dignity of him
etiam habere iustitiam de inferiori papa si tulerit contra who commits it), it is indeed easier to perform justice
fidem sententiam. Maius etiam periculum imminet with respect to the pope's inferior if the latter renders a
omnibus christianis ex sententia hereticali pape, ideo si sentence against the faith. Indeed, a greater danger
quis voluerit in communi forma a tali pape sententia threatens all Christians from a heretical sentence of the
appellare in favorem fidei cui magis favendum est quam pope. Therefore if someone wanted to issue a standard
pape, minus artandus est ad formam appellationis quam appeal in favour of the faith from such a papal sentence
si ab alia sententia iudicis inferioris duxerit (and given that the faith is worthier of support than the
appellandum. Unde et in hoc casu in favorem fidei pope) the appellant in question must be less bound by the
quantum ad multa minor est reverentia exhibenda pape formal requirements of an appeal than if he had decided
et minori debet privilegio gaudere, quemadmodum, si to appeal from some other sentence of a judge inferior to
accusetur, minori privilegio gaudet quam nonnulli alii the pope. And so in this particular case, with support for
presules qui, ut habetur 2 q. 4 c. Presul nonnisi cum 72 the faith at stake, a lesser respect as to many things is to
testibus debent dampnari. Papa autem tali privilegio be shown to the pope, and he must enjoy a lesser
minime gaudet, teste glossa ibidem que ait: "nunquid privilege. Just as, were he accused, he would enjoy a
contra papam duplicabuntur testes. Non. Imo duo lesser privilege than do some other spiritual leaders, who
sufficiunt et in hoc deterioris conditionis quia ipse sine (we have this in 2 q. 4 c. Presul) [col. 466] must not be
comparatione aliorum creatus est maior et ideo sine spe condemned unless 72 witnesses testify against them. But
venie condempnandus est ut diabolus". Ex quibus verbis the pope hardly enjoys such a privilege, as is attested by
patet quod nonnunquam papa propter crimen ipsius the gloss to the cited passage, which states: "should there
minor privilegio gaudet quam inferiores episcopi. Quod be even more witnesses against the pope? No. Indeed
precipue servandum est quando ex crimine pape maius two would suffice, and in this the pope's situation is
periculum imminet christianitati, quod accidit quando worse, because he was elevated above others without
papa contra fidem profert sententiam.
their participation, and therefore he must be condemned
without hope of remission, like the devil". [col. 653] It is
evident from these words that sometimes the pope enjoys
less privilege for his misdeed than do bishops inferior to
him. And this must be especially observed when a
greater danger threatens Christianity due to the pope's
crime, which is indeed the case when the pope issues a
decree against the faith.
Capitulum 27
Chapter 27
Discipulus: Applica supradicta ad interrogationem Student: Apply the aforesaid to my question. Namely,
meam. Quare supra dicitur quod a sententia pape why does one say that it is not necessary to appeal from
heretica non est necesse appellare servando formam et a heretical judgement of the pope by observing the form
puncta etc.
and the details etc.
Magister: Ad interrogationem propositam taliter Master: The aforesaid statements are applied to the
applicantur, quod videlicet non est necesse appellare a proposed question as follows. The point is that there is
tali sententia pape primo modo et secundo accepto no necessity to appeal from such a papal sentence in the
318

