Transtulit igitur imperium de gente in gentem cannot transfer the kingdom of the Franks from one
auctoritate Romanorum qui sibi ex causa rationabili house to another in his capacity as vicar of Christ and
potestatem huiusmodi contulerunt. Ad tertiam successor of blessed Peter, so by reason of the vicarship
respondetur tripliciter. Sunt enim quidam dicentes quod and succession he could not have transferred the empire
cum excommunicatio sit potius iurisdictionis quam of the Romans from nation to nation. He therefore
ordinis, papa in quantum vicarius Christi et successor transferred the empire from nation to nation by the
beati Petri neminem excommunicare potest, sed authority of the Romans who for reasonable cause
potestatem excommunicandi habet ab universali granted to him a power of this kind. There is a threefold
ecclesia que in eum talem transtulit potestatem. Alii response to the third argument. For there are some who
autem dicunt quod non papa sed imperator in imperio et say that since excommunication is more a function of
rex in regno suo potestatem habet excommunicandi.
jurisdiction than of order, the pope can excommunicate
no one in his capacity as the vicar of Christ and the
successor of blessed Peter, but he has the power to
excommunicate from the universal church which
transferred such power to him. Others say however that
it is the emperor in the empire and the king in his
kingdom who has the power to excommunicate, not the
pope.
Discipulus: Istas opiniones puto erroneas sed tamen Student: I consider these opinions to be erroneous, and
secundam magis abhorreo. De ipsis tamen in alio find the second one particularly repugnant. Nevertheless
tractatu tecum collocutionem habebo. Nunc autem dic I shall discourse with you about them in a different
tertiam responsionem.
treatise. Now however let us have the third response.
Magister: Tertia responsio est quod papa in quantum Master: The third response is that as the vicar of Christ
vicarius Christi habet potestatem excommunicandi, sed the pope has the power to excommunicate but in no way
penam maiorem nullatenus inferendi. Dicunt enim quod that of imposing a greater penalty. For they say that
ista est ultima pena quam possunt ecclesiastici exercere. excommunication is the final penalty which
Isti igitur dicunt quod papa in hoc est imperatore ecclesiastical persons may inflict [ John of Paris, ch. 13].
superior sed tamen in aliis est inferior ipso scilicet in In this, say these opponents, the pope is superior to the
omni iurisdictione temporali. Ad quartam rationem emperor, yet in other matters, namely in any temporal
respondetur quod papa non potest deponere jurisdiction, he is inferior to the emperor. The answer to
imperatorem ratione papatus sicut nec ratione papatus the fourth argument is that the pope by reason of his
potest deponere regem Francie. Sed sicut Zacharias papal office cannot depose the emperor, just as he
papa regem Francorum auctoritate populi regni illius cannot in his capacity as pope depose the king of France.
deposuit, et ita illi principaliter deposuerunt, et ut But in the same manner that Pope [Zacharias] deposed
testatur glossa 15 q. 6 c. Alius: "dicitur deposuisse qui the king of the Franks by authority of the people of that
deponentibus consensit", et ita papa auctoritate kingdom and thus it is they who primarily performed the
Romanorum posset imperatorem deponere. Ad quintam deposition, and, witness the gloss to 15 q. 6 c. Alius,
rationem respondetur quod papa ratione papatus non Zacharias "is said to have deposed who gave his consent
potest illegitimos in temporalibus legitimare. Si autem to those who were deposing" [s.v. deposuit, col. 1083]
hoc fecit licite de facto, ratione alicuius alterius just so might the Pope depose the Emperor by authority
potestatis que non est annexa papatui hoc fecit.
of the Romans. The answer to the fifth argument is that
in temporal affairs the Pope as such cannot legitimize
those who are illegitimate. Should he however legally
have done this de facto, he would have done it by reason
of some other power which is not connected to the
papacy.
Discipulus: Responde ad secundam rationem Student: Respond to the second main argument.
principalem.
Magister: Ad secundam rationem respondetur quod Master: The answer to the second argument is that by
papa ratione papatus non est solutus legibus reason of his office the pope is not free of those imperial
imperialibus que divinis legibus non repugnant licet laws which are not incompatible with the laws of God,
aliunde forsitan sit solutus. Ad tertiam rationem although he may perhaps have been released therefrom
principalem respondetur quod clerici nisi sint exempti from another quarter. The answer to the third principal
auctoritate regum vel concilii generalis pertinent ad argument is that clerks belong to the forum of the
forum secularium potestatum. Ad quartam rationem secular powers unless they have been exempted by the
respondetur quod in temporalibus licet appellare a papa authority of kings or of the general council. The answer
ad imperatorem nisi per universalem ecclesiam sit to the fourth argument is that in temporal matters one
exemptus. Ad quintam dicitur quod Christus commisit may appeal from the pope to the emperor unless the
Petro iura imperii terreni, hoc est potestatem super former has been exempted [from the normal appeal
284

