errors must not be numbered among the heresies.
Capitulum 66
Chapter 66
Discipulus: Si pro singulis assertionibus supra scriptis Student: Were you to provide arguments in support of
satageres allegare, timeo quod prolixitatem fastidiosam each and every aforewritten assertion, I fear that you
legentibus generares. Ideo ad defensores heretice would create for readers a boring prolongation of the
pravitatis accedo, de quibus peto ut dicas qua pena sunt discussion. I therefore turn to defenders of heretical
plectendi qui sunt pravitatis heretice defensores, sive wickedness. Concerning these, I request that you state
defendant
pravitatem
hereticam
prohibendo what punishment should be the lot of those who are
impugnatores pravitatis eiusdem ne eam impugnent, eis defenders of heretical wickedness, whether they defend
scilicet pro impugnatione pravitatis heretice qua papa heretical wickedness by prohibiting opponents of this
macularetur hereticus persecutionem et molestiam wickedness from attacking it (namely by inflicting
inferendo, sive allegationes eorum catholicas contra persecution and harm upon them for attacking the
errores pape heretici comburendo aut quovis modo heretical wickedness staining a heretic pope), or by
impediendo malitiose ne ad notitiam perveniant aliorum. incinerating the scripts of their catholic allegations
against the errors of a heretic pope, or by maliciously
preventing these scripts (by whatever means) from
coming to the notice of others.
Magister: Istis modis videtur quibusdam quod infectus Master: It appears to certain thinkers that these are
heretica pravitate defenditur, de qua defensione nonnulli indeed the methods whereby a person infected by
tenent quod huiusmodi pape heretici defensores non heretical wickedness is defended. Some hold as to this
minus peccant quam papa hereticus, nec minori pena defense that such defenders of a heretic pope sin no less
sunt plectendi, imo dicunt quod sunt heretici reputandi. than the heretic pope himself, nor ought they to suffer a
Quia, sicut contingit facto mentiri secundum lesser punishment. In fact, they say that such defenders
Ambrosium, ut habetur 22 q. ultima cap. Cavete, ita are to be considered heretics. Because, just as it is
contingit facto heresi assentire et eam asserere, et per possible to lie by deed according to Ambrose (we have
consequens ex factis absque verbis potest quis ostendi this in 22 q. ultima c. Cavete), [22 q. 5 c. 20, col. 888]
esse hereticus manifestus. Predicti ergo defensores so is it possible to consent to heresy and to assert it by
heretice pravitatis heretici sunt censendi et pena one's action. Consequently, someone may be shown to
hereticorum sunt plectendi, quod multis modis videtur be an obvious heretic by his acts, without reference to
posse probari. Hec enim Urbanus papa, ut legitur 24 q. 3 words. Therefore the aforesaid defenders of heretical
cap. Qui aliorum, sentire videtur, dicens: "qui aliorum wickedness are to be viewed as heretics, and are to
errorum defendit multo est dampnabilior illis, qui errant, suffer the punishment of heretics, a contention
quia non solum ille errat, sed etiam aliis offendicula apparently capable of being proved in many ways. For
preparat erroris et confirmat. Unde quia magister erroris Pope Urban seemingly feels as much when he states (as
est, non tantum hereticus, sed etiam heresiarcha we read in 24 q. 3. c. Qui aliorum): "he who defends the
dicendus est". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod error of others is to be condemned much more than they
defensores errorum sunt heretici reputandi et who err, for he is not only himself in error, but also
dampnabiliores errantibus. Ergo et pari pena sunt prepares and confirms stumbling blocks of errors for
plectendi.
others. Hence, being a teacher of error, he is not only a
heretic, but must also be labeled a heresiarch". [col.
999] One gathers from these words that defenders of
errors are to be reckoned heretics, and are to be
condemned more than those who err. Therefore an equal
punishment is also to be inflicted upon them.
Discipulus: Ista auctoritas non videtur ad propositum, Student: This authority seems to be irrelevant, for it
quia loquitur de defendentibus errores allegando pro eis speaks of those who defend errors by arguing in their
sive verbo sive scripto, quod patet per hoc quod dicit favour either verbally or in writing. This is clear
quod "aliis offendicula erroris preparat et confirmat", et enough, since the authority states that he "prepares and
per hoc quod dicit "magister erroris est". Ista enim ad confirms stumbling blocks of error for others", and also
allegandum pro erroribus pertinere videntur, et by the fact that it states that he "is a teacher of error".
nequaquam spectant ad illos qui impugnatores errorum These descriptions seem to pertain to arguments in
impediunt, persequuntur, et molestant, et qui favour of errors, and do not apply to those who impede,
impugnationes destruunt vel impediunt ne inter persecute, or do harm to individuals opposing the errors,
catholicos publicentur.
nor to those who destroy critical scripts or prevent them
from being published among catholics.
Magister: Dicitur quod instantia tua nulla est, quia licet Master: The response is that your point is worthless.
auctoritas Urbani predicta de allegantibus ex pertinacia For although the aforesaid authority of Urban must be
pro erroribus aliorum verbo vel scripto debeat intelligi, understood of those who argue pertinaciously, verbally
debet nichilominus intelligi etiam de defensoribus facto or in writing, in support of the errors of others, it must
459

