Ergo ad theologos principaliter pertinet diffinitio interpretation, for prophecy never came by the will of
sepedicta.
man." Therefore that oft-mentioned way of deciding
pertains chiefly to theologians.
Octava ratio est hec. Ad tractatores illius scientie The eighth argument is this. That oft-mentioned way of
principaliter pertinet diffinitio sepe fata cui non licet deciding pertains chiefly to the experts on that science to
aliquid addere nec auferre. Huiusmodi autem est which one is not permitted to add and from which one is
theologia, Moyse in persona Dei dicente, Deuteronomio not permitted to remove anything. Such is theology,
4 c., "Non addetis ad verbum quod vobis loquor neque since Moses, speaking in the person of God, says in
auferetis ex eo". Cui concordat Salomon, Proverbiorum Deuteronomy 4[:2], "You shall not add to the word that
30, qui de sermone Dei loquens ait, "Ne addas I speak to you, neither shall you take away from it."
quidquam verbis illius, et arguaris inveniarisque mendax Solomon agrees with this in Proverbs 30[:6]. Speaking
". Hinc addentibus et auferentibus aliquid ex scriptura about the word of God he says, "Add not anything to his
divina Spiritus Sanctus, per beatum Iohannem words, lest thou be reproved and found a liar." Hence
Evangelistam,
Apocalypsis
ultimo,
terribiliter the Holy Spirit through blessed John the evangelist
comminatur, dicens: "Si quis apposuerit ad hec, apponet makes a terrible threat against those who add anything
super illum Deus plagas que sunt in libro isto. Et si quis to or take anything from divine scripture when he says
diminuerit de verbis prophetie libri huius, auferet Deus in the last chapter of Revelations [22:18-9], "If any man
partem eius de libro vite et de civitate sancta et de hiis shall add to these things, God shall add unto him the
que scripta sunt in libro isto" . Ex quibus omnibus plagues which are in this book. And if any man shall
evidenter colligitur quod ad sacram scripturam nichil est take away from the words of the book of this prophecy,
addendum nec aliquid auferendum ex ea. Ergo ad God shall take his part out of the book of life and out of
theologos, tractatores scripture divine, principaliter the holy city, and from these things that are written in
pertinet diffinire per modum doctrine que assertio this book." We clearly gather from all these that nothing
catholica, que heretica, est censenda.
should be added to sacred scripture nor anything
removed from it. To decide by way of teaching,
therefore, which assertion should be considered catholic,
which heretical, chiefly pertains to theologians, the
experts on divine scripture.
Ecce ad interrogationem tuam assertiones contrarias You see that I have set out opposing assertions in
recitavi et in fulcimentum utriusque partis rationes tetigi response to your question and I have touched on quite
fortiores. Nunc ergo considera que probabilior tibi strong arguments in support of each position. Therefore
videtur.
consider now which seems the more probable to you.
Capitulum 3
Chapter 3
Discipulus: QUAMVIS ex rationibus pro assertione Student: ALTHOUGH you have given me occasion to
secunda adductis michi tribueris occasionem multa make many inquiries by the arguments you adduced for
querendi, fateor tamen quod ipsa michi videtur consona the second assertion, yet I confess that it seems to me to
veritati, licet ad rationes pro prima assertione nesciam be consonant with the truth, though I do not know how
satisfacere michi metipsi. Unde peto ut tu ad eas to satisfy myself with respect to the arguments for the
respondeas.
first assertion. I ask, therefore, that you reply to them.
Magister:: Tu videris tibi ipsi contrarius. In principio Master: You seem to contradict yourself. For you asked
enim petisti ut quid de interrogationibus tuis sentirem at first that I not indicate what I thought about your
nullatenus indicarem, nunc autem poscis ut ad aliquas questions; now, however, you ask me to reply to some
rationes respondeam, ex quo convinci potest quod arguments. From this it can be inferred that, to this
desideras quatenus quid teneam in corde aperiam.
extent, you want me to open what I hold in my heart.
Discipulus:: Quidquid petitio mea ex vi vocis insinuet Student: Whatever my request may imply by the force
nullo modo volebam quod quid in mente habeas of my words, I was not in any way wanting you to make
intimares , sed petere intendebam ut responsiones known what you have in your own mind but was
aliorum , vel que cogitari possunt ab aliis, recitares, intending to ask you to report the replies of others, or
nullatenus exprimendo an eas rationabiles vel what can be thought by others, not expressing whether
irrationabiles putes esse censendas.
you think they should be considered reasonable or
unreasonable.
Magister:: Ex quo tuam intentionem concipio, faciam Master: Because I understand your meaning I will do
quod hortaris. In primis autem volo te scire quod aliquos what you urge me to do. First of all, however, I want
cognosco theologos qui moderni temporis canonistas you to know that I am aware of some theologians who in
tanquam non intelligentes, presumptuosos, temerarios, their hearts very much look down on canonists of the
fallaces, deceptores, cavillatores, et ignaros in cordibus modern time as being unintelligent, presumptuous, rash,
suis valde despiciunt, reputantes quod sacrorum misleading, deceitful, scoffers and ignorant, believing
canonum intellectum ignorant . Pro quo tali ratione that they do not know the meaning of the sacred canons.
moventur. Sacrorum canonum dictatores viri They are moved to this view by the following argument.
6

