Magister: Respondetur quod si papa de doctrina Master: Here is the answer. If the pope were defamed of
diffamaretur erronea, omnes predicatores et doctores spreading erroneous doctrine, all preachers and doctors
seu lectores vel magistri, imo etiam omnes literati or lecturers or masters, indeed even all the learned to the
quantum uniuscuiusque ingenio et scientie conveniret extent that this would apply to anyone's intellect and
deberent doctrinam pape erroneam videre, studere, knowledge, would have the duty to see, to study, to
examinare et discutere diligenter, exemplo illorum de examine and to discuss the pope's false theory, following
quibus dicitur Act.17: "cotidie scrutantes scripturas si the example of those about whom it is said in Acts 17
hec ita se haberent".
that they "searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so" [Acts 17:11].
Discipulus: Hoc dicitur de illis qui scrutantur cotidie Student: This is said of those who search for the truth
veritatem, non de scrutantibus doctrinas erroneas.
daily, not of those who scrutinize false doctrines.
Magister: Respondetur quod ad eosdem spectat Master: One replies that it pertains to the same persons
scrutari veritatem et errores contrarias, testante to scrutinize truth and errors contrary thereto, as
Salomone qui Ecclesiasti 1 ait: "dedique cor meum ut witnesses Solomon who states in Ecclesiastes 1: "and I
scirem prudentiam atque doctrinam erroresque et gave my heart to know wisdom and to know madness
stultitiam". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod ita and folly"[Ecclesiastes 1:17]. From these words one
investigandi et discutiendi sunt errores contra fidem gathers that errors against the faith are to be investigated
sicut catholice veritates quia, ut Sapiens attestatur: and discussed as much as catholic truths, because, as the
"idem est iudex sui et obliqui", et "eadem est scientia Wise One attests: "the same one is judge of the direct and
contrariorum". Oportet ergo predicatores et doctores of the slanted"[Aristotle, De anima, I, 5. Cf. also J.
errores pape heretici examinare, studere, et discutere Hamesse, Les Auctoritates Aristotelis, Louvain-Paris
diligenter, quia sic ad veritates plures quas antea 1974, p. 176], and: "the science of contraries is one and
nescierunt pervenient, teste glossa accepta ab the same"[Aristotle, Physica VIII, I, 8 (and Ockham,
Augustino 1 Cor. 11 qui ait: "ab adversario mota OPh VI, p. 119). Cf. also J. Hamesse, op. cit., pp. 134,
questio discendi extitit occasio".
183]. It is therefore proper for preachers and doctors to
examine, to study, and to scrupulously discuss the errors
of a heretical pope, because by proceeding in this manner
they will arrive at many truths which they previously did
not know, witness the gloss borrowed from a comment
on 1 Corinthians 11 by Augustine, who states: "a
problem raised by an opponent became a learning
opportunity"[De Civitate Dei (The City of God), XVI, 2].
Discipulus: Quid facient postquam doctrinam pape Student: What will they do after having scrupulously
erroneam examinaverint diligenter.
examined the erroneous doctrine of the pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod rationibus et scripturarum Master: The answer is that they must provide
testimoniis contra eam quantum possunt debent se themselves with as many arguments and scriptural
munire, ac illi qui scribendi gratiam receperunt scribant attestations against it as they possibly can, and those
et componant libros, tractaus, sermones et epistolas, amongst them who have been blessed with literary
secundum quod videtur expediens ad reprobandum talents will write and compose books, treatises, sermons,
doctrinam pape erroneam, opera vero sua modis sibi and letters, whatever seems expedient, in order to
possibilibus communicent et divulgent, nominibus suis condemn the pope's erroneous doctrine. And of course
tacitis vel expressis, secundum quod expedire videtur. they will communicate and publish their works by
Quedam enim opera ratione auctoris videntur libentius, whatever means are possible to them, concealing or
et tunc erit utile nomen auctoris exprimere. Interdum revealing their names as expediency dictates. For certain
vero multi odio habent auctorem, et tunc illis nomen works are looked at with greater pleasure because of
auctoris operis expedit occultare, ut emuli non quis their author, and in that case it will be useful to state the
dicat sed quid dicatur intendant. Illi vero qui libros, author's name expressly. In some instances however
tractatus, et alia opera componendi gratiam minime many feel hatred towards the author, and in that situation
habent, in scripturis auctenticis et etiam in operibus it is expedient to conceal the author's name from them, so
novis in quibus magis discrete doctrina pape erronea that enemies concentrate not on who is speaking but on
reperitur se occupent studiose, ut cum tempus venerit what is being said [Seneca, De quattuor virtutibus
opportunum errores pape valeant efficaciter reprobare. cardinalibus, in J. Hamesse, op. cit., p. 282 n.8. This
Unde tam illi qui nova opera contra pravitatem pape doctrine was posited as the basis of Ockham's method in
heretici ediderunt quam alii predicatores et doctores in the Dialogus: cf. 1 Dial. Prologus]. As for those who
lectionibus et sermonibus publicis secretisque have little talent for composing books, treatises and other
colloquiis quandoque opportunitas loquendi affuerit, works, let them earnestly engross themselves in authentic
debent errores pape secundum gratiam eis datam scriptures and also in the new works which analyze the
efficaciter reprobare et veritatem contrariam declarare pope's false doctrine more systematically, so that when
et quantum in eis est auribus omnium inculcare. Unde the opportune time will come they might be able to
444

