in the fifth notable point above. But this man persecutes and molests those who preach and hold a Catholic truth,
namely that the souls of the saints in heaven see God, and those who attack the contrary heretical wickedness;
therefore he must be considered a heretic.
The major of this argument is manifest; however, it is shown in many ways. [i] In the first way as follows. Those
who are "wicked concerning the faith" must be regarded as heretics; but one who persecutes and molests
preachers of Catholic faith and attackers of heretical wickedness is wicked concerning the faith, because he
damnably resists the truth. But those who damnably resist the truth [are] wicked concerning the faith, as the
Apostle testifies, who says, 2 Timothy 2 [3:8]: "And just as Iannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so also these
resist the truth, men corrupt in mind, wicked concerning the faith", and consequently they are to be judged
heretics.
[ii] Second as follows. One erring against the faith, who persecutes and molests those who confess Catholic truth
and attack heretical wickedness, does not seek the truth with careful solicitude and is not ready to be corrected;
such a person, however, is a manifest heretic, according to Augustine, reported 24, q. 3, Dicit Apostolus.
Therefore such persons persecuting those who confess Catholic truth are manifest heretics.
Again as follows. One who attacks Catholic truth sins and is at fault more seriously than those who do not
receive preachers of Catholic truth; and yet they [the latter] sin mortally, as truth himself testifies. In Matthew
chapter 10[:14-15], he says: "Whoever does not receive you and does not hear your words, going outside their
house or city, shake the dust from your feet. Amen, I say to you, it will be more bearable for the lands of Sodom
and Gomorrha on the day of judgment than for that city". Therefore those who persecute or molest others
because they hold or preach Catholic truth and attack heretical wickedness sin more seriously, or not less. But
such a grave sin does not exist without pertinacity. Therefore such persons are pertinacious, and consequently
must be regarded as heretics.
Thus therefore the major has been proved, that one erring against the faith who persecutes and molests preachers
and asserters of Catholic truth or those who attack heretical wickedness, must be judged to be a heretic. And the
minor -- that this man does persecute and molest those who preach and hold that the souls of the saints in heaven
see God and those who attack the contrary heretical wickedness -- is proved plainly by his works. [i] First,
because for that reason, it is reported, he subjected a certain preacher, a Master of Theology, to imprisonment.
Second because, as it is said, he deprived of their accustomed sermons those wishing to preach Catholic truth.
Third because, as is reported, he reacted badly to former friends of his persuading him to the aforesaid truth.
Fourth because, as is reported, he tries to twist the writings of those who defend the aforesaid truth, and accuse
them in their words, so that in that way he compels them to abandon the harmonious truth. These things and
many others that he is said to have done to the defenders of Catholic truth are matters of fact, and therefore they
should be proved not by argument or by authority but by witnesses and other lawful evidence.
[ii] Second it is shown by his works that he is a manifest heretic, for one who errs against the faith and promotes
and elevates wicked and malignant people in favour of his error must be considered a heretic, for such a person
is not ready to be corrected and consequently must be regarded as a heretic. But the inventor of the often
mentioned heresy, it is reported, promotes and elevates wicked people in favour of his error; therefore he must
be considered a heretic. The major is manifest. The minor is a matter of fact, and therefore must be proved by
legitimate evidence.
From what has been sent we gather clearly [quod duo: duo quae?] two points that were promised to be proved to
the beginning of this chapter, namely that the assertor of the aforementioned heresy can be converted to Catholic
truth, yet in no way can be excused so that he has not been a heretic.
Third (in the main series) we must say what sort of revocation he ought to make if he wishes to be regarded as a
Catholic, namely such as would declare that he is not a heretic (though by no revocation can he show that he has
not been heretic). To make this clear it must be known that those who err in the first, second and third ways
mentioned in the third of the notable points above [rather, in the fourth?], must, in order to be regarded as
Catholics, simply and absolutely without any condition (as was said in the fifth of the notable points [rather, in
the seventh?]) revoke their error and confess that they have erred. However, those who err in the fourth way
spoken of in the fifth notable point above [rather, in the fourth?], if they learn that they have erred, are
constrained to satisfy the first revocation without any condition to be regarded as Catholics. However, if
someone has erred in the fourth way, he is not obliged to revoke anything (in the proper sense of "revoke"), as
was said before in the sixth notable point, but it is enough for him to make a protestation, unless he can be
convicted of pertinacious animosity by his other words or works.
From these things two points are clear and certain. The first is that all heretics, whether they are heretics
knowingly or unknowingly (their difference has been spoken of in the third notable point above) and all
Catholics who know that they have erred against faith from ignorance or simplicity, to be regarded as Catholics,
they are bound to revoke their error purely and absolutely and simply without any condition, gloss or excuse, and
to confess that they have erred. The second is that a Catholic who errs from simplicity alone is not bound to
revoke any error, but if there is nothing against him except that he held such an error without any pertinacious
533

