inferius ipso potest contra fidem errare; collegium
autem cardinalium est inferius papa; ergo potest contra
fidem errare.

against faith, so every college inferior to him can err
against faith. The college of cardinals, however, is
inferior to the pope. Therefore it can err against faith.

Discipulus Per hanc racionem probaretur quod tota
congregacio fidelium posset contra fidem errare quia
tota est inferior papa.

Student: It would be proved by this argument that
the whole congregation of believers could err against
faith because the whole is inferior to the pope.

Magister Respondetur quod non procedit racio de tota
congregacione fidelium, quia quando sedes apostolica
non vacat, tota congregacio fidelium non est inferior
papa quia comprehendit papam; sed tota multitudo
fidelium preter papam est inferior papa et de illa
multitudine conceditur quod potest contra fidem errare,
quia secundum eos fides posset in solo summo pontifice
remanere.

Master: The reply to that is that the argument is not
valid of the whole congregation of believers because
when the apostolic see is not vacant the whole
congregation of believers is not inferior to the pope
because it includes the pope. But the whole multitude
of believers except for the pope is inferior to the pope
and of that multitude it is granted that it can err
against faith because, according to them, faith could
remain with the highest pontiff alone.

Discipulus Compleas alias raciones?

Student: Would you finish the other arguments?

Magister Quinta racio est hec: de illa sola ecclesia est
tenendum firmiter quod non potest errare contra fidem
de qua firmiter est credendum quod extra ipsam non est
salus; sed extra collegium cardinalium potest esse salus,
multi enim salvantur qui cardinales non sunt; ergo
collegium cardinalium non est illa ecclesia que errare
non potest.

Master: A fifth argument is this. Only about that
church of which it is firmly believed that there is no
salvation outside it should it be firmly held that it can
not err against faith. But there can be salvation
outside the college of cardinals for many who are not
cardinals are saved. Therefore the college of
cardinals is not that church which can not err. [Cf.
ibid., tertio.]

Sexto sic: sicut omnis persona que potest errare in
moribus potest eciam errare contra fidem, ita omne
collegium quod potest errare contra bonos mores potest
errare contra fidem. Collegium autem cardinalium
potest errare contra bonos mores. Si essent enim duo vel
tres cardinales tantummodo non esset necesse quod
aliquis eorum esset in caritate, immo posset quilibet
eorum esse in peccato mortali cum constet quod
nonnumquam viri sceleratissimi ad cardinalatus
officium assumuntur. Ergo idem collegium cardinalium
contra fidem potest errare.

[See Significant Variants, para. 30.] [It is argued]
sixthly as follows. Just as every person who can err
in morals can also err against faith, so every college
which can err against good morals can err against
faith. The college of cardinals, however, can err
against good morals. For if there were only two or
three cardinals it would not be necessary for any of
them to exist in charity - indeed any of them could be
in mortal sin since it is certain that sometimes the
most wicked men are raised to the office of cardinal.
Therefore that college of cardinals can err against
faith.

Septimo sic: illud collegium quod potest circa minora et
faciliora errare potest eciam circa maiora et difficiliora
errare; minus autem et facilius est eligere summum
pontificem quam causas fidei diffinire. Collegium vero
cardinalium potest errare circa eleccionem summi
pontificis manifeste, enim erravit quando mulierem in
papam elegit; posset eciam papam per symoniam
eligere, sicut aperte insinuat glossa 79, dist. c. Si quis
pecunia. Ergo eciam collegium cardinalium in
diffiniendo causas fidei potest errare.

A seventh [argument is] as follows. That college
which can err in lesser and easier matters can also err
in greater and more difficult matters. It is a lesser and
easier matter, however, to choose the highest pontiff
than to determine questions of faith. But the college
of cardinals can err in the choice of the highest
pontiff, for it clearly erred when it chose a woman as
pope. It could also choose a pope as a result of
simony, as the gloss on dist. 79 c. Si quis pecunia
openly implies [s. v. non apostolicus; col.380].
Therefore the college of cardinals can also err in
determining questions of faith.

Octavo sic: collegium cardinalium nec sanctitate nec

An eighth [argument is] the following. The college of

193

