Esto etiam quod scivisset eum inimicum, potuisset Paul had not known Caesar to be an obvious enemy of
Cesarem appellare quia ex causa rationabili licet ad his doctrine, because Caesar had not yet persecuted the
inimicum appellare, sicut etiam licet alicui ex causa se Christians. Even had Paul known Caesar to be an enemy,
iudicio inimici submittere. Paulus igitur volens a iudeis he still could have appealed to him, because one is
liberari et Romam ad evangelium predicandum adduci, permitted to appeal to an enemy for a reasonable cause,
appellavit, et licet scivisset Cesarem fidei inimicum, just as it is likewise permitted to someone to submit
appellasset. Ad tertiam respondetur dupliciter. Uno himself for cause to the judgement of an enemy.
modo quod Paulus erat inferior Cesare et Cesar erat Therefore Paul, who wanted to be liberated from the
iudex suus ordinarius. Aliter dicitur quod licet Cesar Jews and to be brought to Rome in order to preach the
non fuerit iudex ordinarius Pauli tamen Paulus potuit se gospel, proceeded to appeal, and he would have appealed
submittere iudicio Cesaris, quemadmodum papa potest even had he known that Caesar was an enemy of the
se submittere iudicio subditi sui(2 q. 7 Nos), et ideo faith. The response to the third objection is twofold. One
Paulus appellando Cesarem submisit se iudicio Cesaris way is to say that Paul was inferior to Caesar, and that
infidelis quod sibi licitum erat ex causa rationabili.
Caesar was his normal judge. Otherwise one may say
that although Caesar was not Paul's normal judge, Paul
nevertheless could have submitted himself to Caesar's
judgement just as the pope can submit himself to the
judgement of his subject (2 q. 7 Nos), [col. 496] and
therefore when Paul appealed to Caesar he submitted
himself to the judgement of the non-believer Caesar,
which he was allowed to do for reasonable cause.
Discipulus: Quomodo licuit Paulo se submittere iudicio Student: How is it that Paul was permitted to submit
Cesaris infidelis cum non liceat clericis se submittere himself to the judgement of the non-believer Caesar,
iudicio secularium potestatum fidelium.
when it is not permitted to clerks to submit themselves to
the judgement of faithful secular authorities.
Magister: Respondetur quod hoc quodclericis non Master: The answer is that the fact that clerks are not
liceat se in multis causis submittere iudicio secularium permitted in many cases to submit themselves to the
potestatum non est ex lege divina nec ex ordinatione judgement of secular authorities is not based on divine
Christi nec ex lege nature, sed ex iure positivo humano, law, nor on Christ's ordination, nor on natural law, but
ad quod ius Paulus minime tenebatur quia nec tunc derives from positive human law, to which Paul was not
extitit introductum, et ideo sibi licuit se iudicio Cesaris obligated since it had not yet been established in his
submittere quod fecit de facto Cesarem appellando. Ad time. Therefore Paul was allowed to submit himself to
quartam respondetur quod dupliciter potest esse aliquis the judgement of Caesar, which he in fact did by
iudex in causa fidei. Uno modo est aliquis ordinarius appealing to Caesar. The answer to the fourth objection
iudex in causa fidei habens ex officio potestatem is that someone may be judge in a case of faith in two
questiones fidei terminandi, et ad talem iudicem licet distinct ways. The first is that someone is a normal judge
pro causa fidei appellare, sed talis iudex in causa fidei in a case of faith, having official authority to determine
non potest esse aliquis alterius secte. Alio modo potest questions of faith. It is permitted to appeal to such a
aliquisesse iudex quasi arbiter electus et hoc contingit judge for a cause of faith, but in a cause of faith a judge
dupliciter, quia dupliciter contingit compromittere in of this kind cannot be someone of a different religious
aliquem super causa fidei, vel scilicet promittendo quod persuasion. The second possibility is that someone can
illud tenebitur quod ipse secundum conscientiam suam be a judge in the manner of a chosen umpire, and this
reputaverit esse firmiter tenendum, vel quod illud can happen in two ways. For there are two ways to
tenebitur quod ipse iudicaverit esse consonum fidei submit by agreement to an arbitrator in a cause of faith,
christiane. Primo modo liceret compromittere in fidelem namely, either by promising to maintain the view which
si nulla humana constitutio obviaret. Secundo modo the arbitrator would in his own conscience consider as
licuit aliquando compromittere in aliquem infidelem. needing to be firmly held, or else to maintain the view
Sic Athanasius et heretici emuli sui in quendam which the arbitrator would have judged as being in
paganum industrium et literatum compromiserunt, accord with the Christian faith. The first method would
promittendo scilicet quod illud tenerent quod ipse allow a believer to act as arbitrator if no human
iudicaret esse consonum fidei christiane. Qui auditis constitution prevented it. The second method allowed at
allegationibus utriusque partis pro Athanasio tulit some time in the past to submit by agreement to a given
sententiam, diffiniendo videlicet quod assertio Athanasii non-believer. Thus Athanasius and the heretics who were
erat consona et necessario sequebatur ex libris his enemies submitted by agreement to a certain diligent
christianorum, quos tam Athanasius quam sui adversarii and erudite pagan, namely by promising that they would
receperunt, quamvis ipse iudex ipsos nullo modo maintain what he would judge to be in accord with the
susciperet.
Christian faith. Having heard the arguments of both
parties, this arbitrator rendered a sentence in favour of
Athanasius, namely by defining that the assertion of
311

