qui sunt sectatores Iohannis papae 22 non sunt
haeretici nec errantes sed catholici et fideles fortiter
allegabo.

strongly bring points forward to prove that those who
are followers of Pope John XXII are not heretics or
errants but are believing catholics.

Magister Vis ergo quod istius operis hic sit finis?

Master So do you want this to be the end of this [part
of] the work?

William
of
part 1, book 4, chapters 1-5
Text and translation by John Scott.
Copyright © 1999, The British Academy

Ockham,

Dialogus,

Capitulum 1

Chapter 1.

Discipulus Volo hic istum tertium finiri et ad
quartum me transferre. Intendo enim inquirere
quomodo de pertinacia debeat quis convinci. Ante
omnia tamen cupio scire quomodo "pertinax",
diffinitione exprimente quid nominis, diffinitur. Ex
tali namque diffinitione, ut puto, multae difficultates
debent solvi, nec sine ipsius noticia potest sciri
qualiter de pertinacia debeat quis convinci.

Disciple I want to finish this third [book] here and to
move on to the fourth. For I intend to ask how someone
ought to be convicted of pertinacity. First of all,
however, I want to know how "pertinacious" is defined
by a definition expressing the meaning of the word. For
I think that such a definition should resolve many
difficulties and that without such a conception it can not
be known how someone ought to be convicted of
pertinacity.

"Pertinacious" defined
Magister "Pertinax" a quibusdam diffinitur sic:
pertinax est qui persistit in eo quod debet dimittere.
Istam diffinitionem declarant dupliciter. Primo,
auctoritate Isidori dicentis quod pertinax dicitur
quasi impudenter tenax. Ille autem est impudenter
tenax qui tenet quod debet dimittere. Ergo et pertinax
est ille qui tenet et persistit in illo quod debet
dimittere. Secundo, sic: perseverantia et pertinacia
opponuntur et contrarias debent diffinitiones habere.
Sed perseverans dicitur ille qui persistit in illo quod
non debet dimittere. Ergo pertinax dicitur ille qui
persistit in illo quod debet dimittere.

Master "Pertinacious" is defined by certain people thus:
a pertinacious person is one who persists in that which
he ought to put aside. They explain that definition in two
ways. Firstly, on the authority of Isidore who says that a
pertinacious person is described as if he were
shamelessly tenacious; he is shamelessly tenacious,
however, who holds onto what he should put aside; and
that person is pertinacious, therefore, who holds onto
and persists in that which he should put aside.Secondly
thus: perseverance and pertinacity are opposed and
ought to have contrary definitions; but that person is
said to be persevering who persists in that which he
should not put aside; that person is said to be
pertinacious, therefore, who persists in that which he
should put aside.

Discipulus Miror quod isti volunt probare
diffinitionem pertinacis de pertinace, cum diffinitio
de diffinito probari non possit.

Disciple I wonder that they want to prove the definition
of "pertinacious" from one who is pertinacious, since a
definition can not be proved from the thing defined.

Magister Non intendunt probare proprie loquendo
diffinitionem "pertinacis" de pertinace, sed volunt
declarare et per declarationes manifestare
quodammodo diffinitionem "pertinacis".

Master They do not intend strictly speaking to prove the
definition of "pertinacious" from one who is
pertinacious but they want to explain it and by
explanations to make the definition of "pertinacious" in
some way clear.

Discipulus De talibus difficultatibus nolo me
intromittere multum ad praesens, sed aliud movet me
contra diffinitionem praedictam, quia secundum eam

Disciple I do not want to get much involved with such
difficulties now, but something else moves me against
the aforesaid definition because according to it everyone

107

