condemnata.

witnesses or other legitimate proofs. If it can not be
proved that he is pertinacious he should be examined
about whether he is ready to correct himself if it is
clearly shown to him that his heresy has been
explicitly condemned.

Secunda ratio est haec. Nullus est statim reputandus
haereticus si tenet haeresim cuius contradictoriam non
tenetur credere explicite. Haec enim est causa quare si
aliquis neget aliquam veritatem contentam explicite in
Scriptura Divina non est propter hoc statim reputandus
haereticus. Sed nullus vel pauci tenetur vel tenentur
explicite credere omnes veritates contradictorias
haeresibus damnatis explicite quia multi non habent
libros nec habere possunt in quibus damnationes
explicite continentur. Ergo licet ignoranter teneat quis
haeresim damnatam explicite non est statim haereticus
iudicandus.

A second argument is this. No one should be
immediately regarded as a heretic if he holds a heresy
the contradiction of which he is not bound explicitly to
believe. For this is the reason why someone who
denies some truth contained explicitly in divine
scripture is not thereby immediately to be regarded as
a heretic. But no one or few people are bound to
believe explicitly all the truths which contradict
explicitly condemned heresies because many do not
have, nor can have, the books which contain the
explicit condemnations. Even if someone unknowingly
holds an explicitly condemned heresy, therefore, he
should not immediately be judged a heretic.

Discipulus Quomodo potest quis negare veritatem
contentam expresse in Scriptura Sacra nisi sit
haereticus?

Student How can someone deny a truth explicitly
contained in sacred scripture unless he is a heretic?

Magister Sufficit credere omnem veritatem Scripturae
Divinae implicite. Sic enim beatus Augustinus aliquas
veritates contentas in Scriptura nescienter negavit et
ideo non fuit haereticus, sic etiam beatus Hieronimus
veritatem evangelii negare videtur cum, loquens de
redemptore nostro in quadam homelia, dicit, "Et
interrogabat discipulos suos, dicens, 'Quem dicunt
homines esse filium hominis?'; non dixit, 'Quem me
esse dicunt homines?' ne iactanter de se quaerere
videretur." Et tamen Lucas in evangelio suo c. 9
expresse refert quod Iesus interrogavit discipulos suos
dicens, "Quem me dicunt esse turbae?" Ecce quod
Hieronimus dicit quod Christus non dixit, "Quem me
dicunt esse homines?" Lucas autem dicit quod dixit,
"Quem me dicunt esse turbae?" Ubi inter Hieronimum
et beatum Lucam aperta contrarietas invenitur, et
tamen Hieronimus non est reputandus haereticus, quia
non pertinaciter, sed quia de textu evangelii Lucae
tunc non recordabatur, negavit evangelii veritatem.

Master It is enough to believe every truth of divine
scripture
implicitly. For blessed Augustine
unknowingly denied some truths contained in scripture
in this way and therefore was not a heretic. So also
blessed Jerome seems to deny the truth of the gospel
when, speaking of our redeemer in one of his homilies,
he says: "And he began to question his disciples
asking them, 'Who do men say the son of man is'; he
did not say, 'Who do men say that I am' lest he were
seen to ask about himself boastfully." Yet in chapter 9:
[18] of his gospel Luke expressly reports that Jesus
asked his disciples, "Who do the people say that I
am?" Note that Jerome says that Christ did not say
"Who do men say that I am?" while Luke says that he
did say "Who do the people say that I am?" A clear
contradiction is thereby found between Jerome and
blessed Luke, and yet Jerome should not be regarded
as a heretic, because he did not deny the truth of the
gospel pertinaciously, but at the time he did not
remember the text of Luke's gospel.

Capitulum 21

Chapter 21

Discipulus Per instantias quas feci discurre.

Student Run through the objections that I made.

Magister Ad primam tuam instantiam respondetur
quod non omnis tenens haeresim damnatam explicite
est haereticus reputandus, licet multi tenentes haereses
damnatas explicite per alia documenta valeant probari
haeretici, si posssint videlicet convinci quod
pertinaciter tenuerint haeresim damnatam explicite.

Master The answer to your first objection is that not
everyone holding an explicitly condemned heresy
should be regarded as a heretic, even if many people
holding explicitly condemned heresies can be proved
by other proofs to be heretics, that is if they can be
convicted of pertinaciously holding an explicitly
condemned heresy.

137

