innuere est quod papa hereticus quamdiu ab ecclesia to suggest is that a heretic pope should in no way be
toleratur est nullatenus expugnandus. Quod videbatur destroyed so long as he is tolerated by the church. This
quibusdam falsum propter falsam implicationem. Quia appeared to some to be false because of an erroneous
si papa hereticus ab ecclesia toleratur, aut toleratur ab implication. For if a heretic pope is tolerated by the
ecclesia catholica aut ab ecclesia heretica et church, either he is tolerated by the catholic church or by
schismatica. Si ab ecclesia heretica et schismatica, a church which is heretic and schismatic. If by a church
constat quod propter eius tolerantiam non est ab heretic and schismatic, it is manifest that on account of
expugnatione pape heretici desistendum. Si autem its toleration one must not forego the elimination of a
toleratur ab ecclesia catholica hoc non potest contingere heretic pope. If, on the other hand, the catholic church
nisi quia ecclesia catholica ignorat papam esse tolerates him, this can only happen because the catholic
hereticum. Si enim sciret ipsum esse hereticum, eum church is unaware that the pope is a heretic. For if it
nullatenus toleraret. Sed propter ignorantiam ecclesie knew that he was a heretic it would in no way tolerate
catholice non est ab expugnatione pape heretici him. But because of the ignorance of the catholic church
cessandum quando probari potest esse hereticus. Illi one must not desist from the destruction of a heretic pope
enim qui sciunt papam esse hereticum si possunt when it can be demonstrated that he is a heretic. For
probare eum esse hereticum debent hoc ecclesie those who know that the pope is a heretic must reveal
catholice nuntiare, que postquam quesierit sollicite et this to the catholic church if they can prove him to be a
reperierit veritatem, papam hereticum nullatenus heretic. After the church has diligently inquired and
tolerabit. Qui autem debent perfidiam pape heretici discovered the truth, it will in no way tolerate a heretic
ecclesie catholice nuntiare debent ipsum, si habent pope. And those who have the duty of announcing to the
officium docendi, efficaciter reprobare. Ergo quamvis catholic church the treachery of a heretic pope must also
ab ecclesia catholica ignorante papa hereticus toleretur, condemn him with effect if they possess a teaching
non debent predicatores et doctores scientes eum esse responsibility. Therefore even if an uninformed catholic
hereticum ab eius impugnatione cessare, et ita quamvis church tolerates a heretic pope, the preachers and doctors
papa hereticus ab ecclesia catholica hoc est a who know that he is a heretic must not stop attacking
multitudine christiani populi toleretur, est tamen a him. And thus even if a heretic pope is tolerated by the
scientibus eum esse hereticum viriliter expugnandus. catholic church, that is to say by the multitude of the
Christian people, he must nevertheless be vigorously
assaulted by those who know that he is a heretic.
Discipulus: Hic essent duo probanda, quorum primum Student: Here two things would need to be proved. The
est quod ecclesia catholica papam hereticum scienter first of which is that the catholic church would never
nullatenus toleraret. Secundum est quod illi qui scirent knowingly tolerate a heretic pope. The second is that
papam esse hereticum deberent hoc ecclesie catholice they who knew that the pope was a heretic would be
nuntiare quando possent hoc probare. Unde ista duo obligated to reveal this to the catholic church when they
coneris probare.
could advance corroborative evidence. Attempt if you
will to demonstrate both points.
Magister: Primum probatur sic. Licet ecclesia Master: The first is proved as follows. Although the
catholica quantum ad ea que facti sunt possit errare catholic church may err as to matters of fact (whence the
(unde et ecclesia universalis erravit quantum ad aliquid universal church did commit a factual error when it
quod facti erat quando mulierem venerabatur pro papa, venerated a woman as pope ['Pope Joan': cf. Ockham OQ
et sic etiam posset errare si aliquis non baptizatus qui 1.17.22-24], and it might likewise err in this fashion if
crederetur esse baptizatus vel aliquis occultus hereticus some unbaptized individual who was believed to be
eligeretur in papam et ab ecclesia universali pro papa baptized or some secret heretic were to be elected pope
haberetur), tamen quantum ad ea que iuris sunt divini et and recognized as pope by the universal church),
naturalis ecclesia universalis errare non potest. Sed si nevertheless the universal church cannot be in error as to
ecclesia universalis papam hereticum toleraret, erraret matters which pertain to divine and natural law. But were
quantum ad ea que sunt iuris divini quia scienter the universal church to tolerate a heretic pope, it would
haberet pro papa eum qui iure divino esset papatu err as to matters of divine law, because it would
privatus quod non esset sine errore iuris divini, quia knowingly recognize as pope one who would have been
reputare hereticum verum papam est contra sacram deprived of the papacy by divine right, a recognition
scripturam quia ex scriptura divina colligitur evidenter which would not avoid an error of divine law, since to
quod papa hereticus non est verus papa, ut ostensum est reckon a heretic to be a true pope is against Holy Writ, in
libro sexto capitulo 68. Ergo ecclesia catholica that one evidently concludes from Divine Scripture that a
nunquam scienter papam hereticum tolerabit.
heretic pope is not a true pope, as was shown in the 68th
chapter of Book Six [1 Dial. 6.68]. Therefore the catholic
church will never knowingly tolerate a heretic pope.
Discipulus: Ista ratio non procedit, quia ecclesia Student: This is not an effective argument, because the
catholica tolerando papam hereticum non erraret catholic church by tolerating a heretic pope would not err
quantum ad ea que sunt iuris divini nisi papam as to matters of divine law unless it reckoned a heretic
433

