omnis errans est pertinax. Omnis enim errans
aliquamdiu est in errore. Sed nullus unquam debet
esse in errore, immo omnis errans debet errorem
dimittere. Ergo omnis errans est pertinax.

erring is pertinacious. For everyone erring is in error for
some time; but no one should ever be in error; on the
contrary everyone erring should put aside his error.
Everyone erring, therefore, is pertinacious.

Magister Dicunt per aequivocationem te decipi. Est
enim debitum necessitatis et est debitum
congruitatis. In praedicta autem diffinitione debet
accipi secundum quod importat debitum necessitatis,
ut iste sit sensus: pertinax est ille qui persistit in
aliquo quod de necessitate debet dimittere. Esto ergo
quod omnis errans debito congruitatis deberet
omnem errorem dimittere, quod non est verum, non
tamen omnis errans de necessitate salutis omni
tempore debet errorem suum dimittere.

Master They say that you are misled by an ambiguity,
for there is a duty of necessity and a duty of congruity.
In the aforesaid definition, however, it should be taken
in a way that implies the duty of necessity, so that this is
its sense: that person is pertinacious who persists in
something which he should of necessity put aside. Even
if, therefore, everyone erring were bound, by the duty of
congruity, to put aside every error - which is not true yet it is not the case that everyone erring should of
necessity for salvation put aside his error at every time.

Discipulus Video quod isti diffiniunt "pertinacem"
communius quam competat erranti in fide. Ideo
appropria diffinitionem praedictam erranti in fide.

Disciple I see that they define "pertinacious" more
generally than would be appropriate to one erring in
faith. Make the aforesaid definition then specific to one
erring in faith.

Magister Appropriatur sic. Pertinaciter errans in fide
est qui persistit in heresi quam debet de necessitate
salutis dimittere.

[See Significant Variants, para. 14.] Master It is made
specific thus. He errs pertinaciously in faith who persists
in a heresy which he ought to put aside from the
necessity of salvation.

Discipulus Appropria eandem dubitanti pertinaciter
contra fidem.

Disciple Make the same [definition] specific to one
doubting the faith pertinaciously.

Magister Appropriatur sic. Pertinaciter dubitans
contra fidem est qui persistit in dubitatione circa ea
quae fidei sunt quam debet de necessitate salutis
dimittere.

Master It is made specific thus. That person
pertinaciously doubts the faith who persists in doubt,
which from the necessity of salvation he should put
aside, about matters of faith.

Discipulus Secundum praedicta omnes Iudaei et
Gentiles essent pertinaces quia omnes tenentur
errorem suum dimittere.

Disciple According to the above remarks, all Jews and
gentiles would be pertinacious because they are all
obliged to put aside his error.

Magister Ista est difficultas quae longum tractatum
requireret propter illos qui nunquam de fide vera
informati fuerunt; nec est defectus illorum quod
informationem minime habuerunt si qui sunt tales.
De aliis autem Gentilibus et Iudaeis isti dicunt aperte
quod debent in numero pertinacium reputari.

Master That is a difficulty which would require a long
treatise because of those who have never been instructed
in the true faith. Because they have not had any
instruction it is not a failing of theirs if they are such as
they are. They say plainly of other gentiles and Jews,
however, that they ought to be reckoned among the
number of the pertinacious.

Capitulum 2

Chapter 2.

Discipulus De ista difficultate nolo tecum ad
praesens collationem habere, sed volo te interrogare
de proposito principali, scilicet quomodo de
pertinacia valeat quis convinci.

Disciple I do not want to discuss that difficulty with you
at the moment, but I want to ask you about the main
subject, namely, how someone can be convicted of
pertinacity.

Magister Circa illa quae fidei sunt duplex potest
pertinacia inveniri. Una mentalis, quando scilicet

Master Two kinds of pertinacity can be found in
connection with matters of faith. One is mental, namely

108

