Athanasius was in accord with the books of the
Christians and necessarily followed therefrom, the same
books whose authority both Athanasius and his
opponents recognized, although the judge himself in no
way recognized the books as authoritative.
Discipulus: Videtur quod Athanasius compromittendo Student: It appears that Athanasius committed a mortal
in paganum peccavit mortaliter, se videlicet obligando sin by submitting to arbitration by a pagan, since this
ad heresim sustinendam si ipse paganus dedisset would have obligated him to maintain a heresy if the
sententiam quod assertio hereticorum erat consona fidei pagan had rendered judgement that the assertion of the
christiane.
heretics was in accord with Christian faith.
Magister: Respondetur quod Athanasius non peccavit, Master: The answer is that Athanasius did not sin,
quia licet promitteret stare sententie pagani predicti non because although he had promised to abide by the
tamen promisit stare inique sententie eius, et ideo non judgement of the aforementioned pagan, he had not, for
obligavit se ad heresim sustinendam si diffinisset all that, promised to abide by this pagan's unjust
assertionem hereticorum fuisse consonam fidei sentence, and therefore he did not bind himself to
christiane, quia iniquum arbitrium nullatenus est support a heresy had the pagan defined the assertion of
servandum (Extra, De arbitris, c. Non sine et c. heretics to be in accord with Christian faith. For an
Exposita.) In tali enim compromisso subintelligenda est unjust verdict is not to be observed (Extra, De arbitris, c.
talis conditio licet non exprimatur: si arbiter non fuerit Non sine [col. 230] and c. Exposita). [col. 236] Indeed in
arbitratus inique.
such an arbitration agreement the following condition
must be implicitly understood even if it is not explicitly
stated: 'if the arbitrator will not have rendered an unjust
verdict'.
Discipulus: Videtur quod Athanasius non debuit Student: It appears that Athanasius should not have
compromittere in paganum super questione fidei, cum accepted arbitration by a pagan on a question of faith,
secundum iura canonica etiam super rebus spiritualibus since according to canon law it is not even permitted to
non liceat compromittere in laicum (Extra, De arbitris, accept the arbitration of a layman in spiritual matters
c. Contingit.)
(Extra, De arbitris c. Contingit). [col. 235]
Magister: Respondetur. Quod de rebus spiritualibus Master: One responds that it is a church ordination and
non potest compromitti in laicum est ex ordinatione not divine law, which forbade arbitration by a layman in
ecclesie et non ex lege divina, et ideo Athanasius licite spiritual matters. Therefore Athanasius was allowed to
compromisit in paganum, quia tunc non erat prohibitum. accept a pagan's arbitration because this was not
forbidden at the time.
Discipulus:
Miror
quod
Athanasius
voluit Student: I am amazed that Athanasius would have
compromittere in paganum cum pagani etiam testes wanted to accept the arbitration of a pagan, since pagans
nequeant esse contra christianos.
cannot even be witnesses against Christians.
Magister: Respondetur quod ecclesia postquam habuit Master: The answer is that after the church had acquired
favorem imperatorum et regum multa statuit contra the favour of emperors and kings it enacted many
paganos que nec ex lege divina nec ex ordinatione regulations against pagans, which did not previously
Christi erant antea constituta, et ideo multa sunt modo exist either by divine law or by Christ's ordination. Many
illicita que tunc licita errant. Tunc enim licitum erat sub things are thus forbidden today which were permitted in
imperatore apostata militare. Unde et multi sancti earlier times. In those days, for instance, it was permitted
martyres et alii christiani sub Iuliano apostata militabant to wage war under the leadership of an emperor who was
et sibi in hiis que non erant contra legem divinam an apostate, and so many holy martyrs and other
obedierunt sine peccato. Nunc tamen nulli christiano Christians waged war under Julian the Apostate and
liceret sub imperatore apostata militare. Sic nunc non obeyed him without sin in all matters that were not
esset licitum de fide compromittere in paganum. against the divine law. In our times however it would not
Tempore autem Athanasii non erat illicitum.
be permitted to any Christian to wage war under an
apostate emperor. Likewise it would not be permitted
today to submit to a pagan's arbitration about the faith,
but in the time of Athanasius this was not forbidden.
Discipulus: Que utilitas fuit quod Athanasius Student: What was the advantage gained by Athanasius'
compromisit in paganum.
submitting to a pagan's arbitration.
Magister: Respondetur quod multiplex fuit utilitas, quia Master: The answer is that there were numerous
catholici post sententiam pagani pro Athanasio fidem advantages. For after the pagan rendered his decision in
poterant liberius predicare et heretici multorum favour of Athanasius, the catholics could preach the faith
amiserunt favorem. Unde autem hoc accidit gesta more freely, and the heretics lost the goodwill of many.
illorum temporum te poterunt edocere.
Indeed the recorded history of those times will teach you
312

