faith by one's example or one's words. This example
does not prove, therefore, that prelates should be
accused by their subjects, unless they happen to have
turned away from the faith or to have forced others to
turn away." [col.495] It is clear from these words that
blessed Peter fell into error by not walking rightly
according to the truth of the gospel.
Discipulus Nunquid doctores moderni tenent quod
beatus Petrus erravit contra fidem?

Student: Do modern doctors maintain that blessed
Peter erred against the faith?

Magister Thomas de Aquino hoc tenet aperte. Nam 2.
2. q. 33. art. 4. dicit in hec verba, "... in faciem resistere
coram omnibus excedit modum fraterne correccionis.
Et ideo sic Paulus Petrum non reprehendisset nisi
aliquo modo esset par quantum ad fidei defensionem."
Et subdit, "Sciendum tamen est quod ubi imminet
periculum fidei eciam essent publice prelati a subditis
arguendi. Unde et Paulus, qui erat subditus Petro,
propter imminens periculum scandali circa fidem
Petrum publice arguit.

Master: Thomas Aquinas plainly maintains this. For
he says the following at 2, 2, q. 33, article 4, "... to
resist someone to their face in front of everyone
exceeds the proper measure of fraternal correction.
And therefore Paul would not have rebuked Peter in
this way unless he were in some way his equal in
respect to the defence of the faith. ... It should be
known, nevertheless, that when danger threatens the
faith prelates should be reproved by their subjects
even publicly. For this reason, that there was
imminent danger of a scandal, Paul, who was subject
to Peter, publicly reproved him on a matter of faith."

Discipulus Miror quomodo isti presumunt beatum
Petrum inter hereticos numerare.

Student: I marvel how they presume to number
blessed Peter among the heretics.

Magister Erras ipsis imponendo falsum quod minime
dicunt. Non enim senciunt quod beatus Petrus fuerit
hereticus licet erraverit, quia suo errori pertinaciter
nequaquam adhesit. Nam ad correccionem beati Pauli
statim se correxit et reprehensionem eiusdem libenter
audivit; nec beatum Paulum predicantem veritatem in
aliquo molestavit.

Master: You are mistaken and are attributing to them
a falsity that they do not say. For they do not think
that blessed Peter was a heretic, even though he erred,
because he did not cling to his error pertinaciously.
For at blessed Paul's correction he immediately set
himself right and willingly listened to his rebuke; nor
did he in any way interfere with blessed Paul's
preaching of the truth.

Discipulus Ut video secundum istos si beatus Petrus
suo errori pertinaciter adhesisset fuisset inter hereticos
computandus. Ideo ad alia exempla te converte.

Student: As I see it then, according to them if blessed
Peter had clung pertinaciously to his error he would
have been reckoned as among the heretics. So would
you turn to other examples.

Magister Secundum exemplum est de beato
Marcellino papa qui contra fidem erravit idola
adorando. De quo Nicolaus papa ut habetur dist. 21, c.
Nunc autem ait, 'Tempore Diocleciani et Maximiani
augustorum Marcellinus episcopus urbis Rome, qui
postea insignis martyr effectus, est adeo compulsus est
a paganis ut templum eorum ingressus grana thuris
super prunas imponeret." Et in Legenda eius sic legitur,
"Marcellinus ad sacrificandum ductus est ut thurificaret
quod et fecit." Et in cronicis sic eciam habetur, "Hic
compulsus a Diocleciano incensum posuit idolis." Et
infra, 'Ad scelus', inquit, 'idolatrie iudico me
deponendum et anathematizo eciam quicumque corpus
meum tradiderit sepulture', et flens dixit, 'Heu me
amarum et non possum in sacerdocio remanere.'" Ex

Master: The second example concerns blessed Pope
Marcellin who erred against the faith by worshipping
idols. As we find in dist. 21, c. Nunc autem [col.71],
Pope Nicholas says about him, "In the time of the
emperors Diocletian and Maximin, Marcellin, bishop
of the city of Rome, who later became a noteworthy
martyr, was put under such compulsion by pagans that
he entered their temple and put grains of incense on
the coals." And in his Legend we read as follows,
"Marcellin was conducted to a place of sacrifice to
burn incense and he did so." And we also find this in
the Chronicles, "Being compelled by Diocletian he
put in place incense for idols. ... 'I judge', he said, 'that
I should be deposed for the crime of idolatry and I
anathematise too whoever hands my body over to

168

