15

PREFACE

This edition of Ockham's Dialogus is work in progress, with different parts at different stages.
Some of it is simply a transcription of the text found in Melchior Goldast's Monarchia. About
half of the text, however, has by now been corrected by comparison with at least the more
promising manuscripts. Some of it is almost ready for print publication.
The work was begun in 1995 by John Kilcullen and John Scott. They have now been joined
by George Knysh and Volker Leppin. The editorial team has been enlarged to bring it to
completion sooner and to provide the benefit of close scrutiny of text and translation by a
larger team. It is being published on the Web so that interested people can use it while it is
still in draft and so that the editors can have the benefit of comment. Comment is very
welcome, either on the editorial policy or on matters of detail. Contact information is given
below.
John Kilcullen,
George Knysh,
Volker Leppin and
John Scott.
January, 2001.
15.1

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Dr Christine Asmar, who keyed in most of the Goldast text, to Juanita
Ruys, who keyed in Part 1 book 7 and Part 2, and to Robert Nash, who collated some of the
manuscripts. We are grateful also to Professors A.S. McGrade, D. Luscombe and J. Miethke
for encouraging the original editors to undertake the project and for helping it along in various
ways. We are grateful to the British Academy for its sponsorship and for a grant of some
funds. John Kilcullen and John Scott wish to thank the Australian Research Council and
Macquarie University for research funds. George Knysh thanks the University of Manitoba
for the grant of research funds. We are grateful to the staff of the Macquarie University
Library and to staff of many libraries who have answered our inquiries or provided
microfilms (for a list of libraries whose staff kindly answered our inquiries, see "Witnesses to
the Text", Search for More Manuscripts). For Part 3, Tract 2, Book 3, chapter 6, we have made use
of H.S. Offler, 'The Three Modes of Natural Law in Ockham: A Revision of the Text',
Franciscan Studies, 37 (1977), pp. 207-18.
15.2

CONTACT INFORMATION

John Kilcullen

(postal address: Humanities, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109,

Australia).
George Knysh

(postal address: St Paul's College, 70 Dysart Road, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

R3T 2M6)
(postal address: Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universitaet, Fachbereich
Evangelische Theologie, Historische Theologie, Hausener Weg 120 D-60489 Frankfurt/
Main).
John Scott (postal address: Humanities, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109,
Australia).
Volker Leppin

1000

