And if it is said, that by that argument no such protestation would excuse anyone erring against the faith so that
he was not a heretic, since such a protestation is thus common to Catholics and to many heretics (because to all
heretics who are heretics unknowingly), as holding or preaching a heresy contrary to Catholic faith, it can with
probability be said that no one who errs pertinaciously can be excused by such a protestation before God, though
before the Church, which can be deceived, a person erring against a Catholic truth that he is not bound to believe
explicitly can be excused, if he cannot be convicted of pertinacity in another way---and then indeed it is not only
such a protestation that excuses him, but [he is excused] simultaneously by the protestation and the failure to
prove pertinacity in another way. But someone who holds, teaches, or preaches a heresy contrary to a Catholic
truth that he is bound to believe explicitly, and knows that he does this, can certainly be convicted of heretical
wickedness, and therefore such a person can in no way be excused by such a protestation.
[8] Eighth, therefore, these two points must be proved: first, that anyone who preaches and holds a heresy
contrary to a truth he is bound to believe explicitly must be judged a heretic immediately without further inquiry;
second, that though such a person can be converted to Catholic truth, nevertheless he can in no way---by the
aforesaid protestation or in any other way whatever---be excused so that he has not been a heretic. The first is
plainly proved as follows. That truth which has been published among all Catholics as Catholic must be believed
explicitly by all. We gather this evidently from the third notable point written above [rather, from the second].
But that the souls of the saints in heaven clearly see God has been published among all Catholics as being
Catholic, since this man became Pope and before, and until after he became Pope no case called it into doubt.
Therefore he was bound and is bound also to believe it explicitly, just like the [truth] that Christ suffered. From
this it follows that he holds and preaches a heresy contrary to a truth he is obliged to believe explicitly. Therefore
immediately, without further inquiry or examination, he must be judged a heretic. For from the fourth notable
point above we gather this evidently. For it was there proved that every such erring person is a manifest heretic,
and therefore when it is certain that such person errs, he must be regarded as a heretic.
It is also proved likewise in another way. He who held and taught that Christ did not suffer and die would be
immediately regarded as a heretic, for the reason that it is published among all Catholics as Catholic that Christ
suffered and died; therefore whoever denies a truth that is published as being Catholic among all Catholics must
be regarded as a heretic. And concerning such a person it must not be asked whether he is ready to be corrected
or not ready to be corrected, whether he protests or does not protest, but he must be regarded immediately as a
heretic. For otherwise no difference could be assigned between those who err against what they are bound to
believe explicitly and those who err against what they are not bound to believe explicitly.
Again, one who errs against faith, if he should be excused of heretical wickedness, ought to be excused by
ignorance; therefore anyone erring against the faith who labours under ignorance, which does not excuse unless
is proved, should not be excused by ignorance before he does prove it. Similarly he who errs against a truth
published among all Catholics as Catholic and is not ignorant that this truth has been published among all as
Catholic, does not labour under an ignorance that excuses him before the Church, unless he proves that
ignorance. For according to the holy canons, no one is permitted not to know things done publicly. And if he
alleges such ignorance, he will prove it (9, q. 1, Ordinationes, in the text and in the gloss [s.v. nisi probare, col.
866]). Therefore he who denies a Catholic truth commonly published among Catholics, if he wishes by
protesting in any way to excuse himself of heretical wickedness by ignorance, ought to prove that ignorance.
Thus, if this man could prove lawfully that he never heard any Catholic preach, hold, teach, or assert that the
souls of the saints in heaven see God, he could be excused of heretical wickedness; but otherwise not, just as
someone denying that Christ suffered would also be excused of heretical wickedness (unless in some other way
he were convicted of pertinacity) by such a protestation, namely that he did not intend to say anything against the
faith, and if he said that he revoked the whole. Therefore it has been proved in this way by one argument to
avoid prolixity; for through sacred canons asserting that no one is permitted not to know things that are done,
carried on and held publicly, it could be confirmed in many ways that the inventor of the often mentioned heresy
can not, by the protestation he made, in any way be excused so that he was not and is not still a heretic.
And second it must be proved that although he can be converted to the Catholic faith, nevertheless in no way,
either by the above protestation or in any other way whatever, can he be excused so that he was not a heretic.
This is proved briefly as follows. One who in truth of fact is a heretic, though he could be converted,
nevertheless in no way can be excused so that he was not wicked; but this man was a heretic; therefore, though
he can be converted to the Catholic faith, nevertheless he cannot be excused so that he has not been heretic.
The major is manifest. The minor is proved, first by the above, because he preached and taught a heresy contrary
to a Catholic truth that he is bound to believe explicitly; therefore he was a heretic.
It is proved secondly as follows. As is clear from the fifth notable point, one who errs against Catholic truth is
convicted not only through the words he asserts, but also by his deeds and works; and therefore to convict him of
pertinacity and heretical wickedness one must notice not only his words, but together with the words one must
consider the works through which a person is manifestly convicted of pertinacity.
Again as follows. One who errs against the faith and persecutes and molests those who preach, teach, defend or
hold Catholic truth and those who attack heretical wickedness, must be judged a heretic, as has been touched on
532

