laudabiliter abegerunt.

burst out." It is clear from this that Anastasius was
defiled with heretical wickedness, on account of
which catholic clerics laudably renounced communion
with him.

Discipulus Ex hiis non habetur quod Anastasius fuerit
hereticus, sed quod communicavit heretico, scilicet
Fotino. Multi autem communicant hereticis qui heretici
minime sunt censendi.

Student: We do not learn from this that Anastasius
was a heretic but that he had dealings with a heretic,
that is with Fotinus. But many people who have
dealings with heretics should not be considered
heretics.

Magister Iste communicavit hereticis pertinaciter in
crimine. Unde dicit glossa quod "Hic communicavit in
maleficio", scilicet in heresi, et ideo fuit hereticus quia
scienter communicavit in heresi per ecclesiam
dampnata. Quod patet ex hoc quod Achacium quem
scivit propter heresim iam dampnatam ab ecclesia
condemnatum voluit revocare, et ita iste Anastasius
inciderat scienter in assercionem quam scivit esse
dampnatam; quare fuit hereticus reputandus.

Master: He had dealings with heretics and was
pertinacious in his crime. So the gloss says that "this
man participated in wrong-doing", that is in heresy,
and was therefore a heretic because he knowingly
participated in a heresy condemned by the church.
This is clear from the fact that he wanted to recall
Achacius whom he knew to be condemned by the
church for a heresy already condemned, and so
Anastasius himself had knowingly agreed with an
assertion which he knew was condemned; therefore he
was to be regarded as a heretic.

Discipulus Ex cronicis et glossis super decreta satis
apparet Anastasium fuisse hereticum ideo aliud pone
exemplum.

Student: It is clear enough from the chronicles and
the glosses on the decretals that Anastasius was a
heretic, and so would you cite another example.

Magister Quintum exemplum adducitur non ad
probandum quod papa de facto erravit, sed ad
monstrandum quod papa hereticari potest et de
pravitate heretica accusari. Nam, sicut legitur in
decretis 2, q. 7, para. Item cum Balaam, Romana
synodus ordinavit quod Simachus papa accusancium
obieccionibus responderet. Unde sic habetur ibidem,
"Simachus papa in Romana synodo dignitate sua
expoliatus prius statui suo reddi precipitur ut veniret ad
causam et, si ita recte videretur, accusancium
proposicionibus responderet. Digna res visa est
maximo numero sacerdotum atque meretur effectum; et
cum postmodum ordinaretur quomodo esset
accusandus prefatus papa ut causam diceret occurrebat
sed ab emulis est impeditus." Ex hiis verbis colligitur
quod Simachus papa extitit accusatus et quod iudicio
synodi poterat accusari. De quo autem crimine fuit
accusatus explicat glossa dist. 17. para, Hinc eciam,
dicens quod Simachus papa "primo fuit accusatus de
heresi, sed cum appareret calumpnia accusantis fuit
postea absolutus". Patet igitur ex hiis quod synodus
reputavit Simachum papam posse de heresi accusari, et
per consequens papa potest hereticari.

Master: The fifth example is brought forward not to
prove that a pope has in fact fallen into error, but to
show that the pope can become a heretic and be
accused of heretical wickedness. For, as we read in
the decretals at 2, q. 7, c. Item cum Balaam [col.496],
the Roman synod decreed that Pope Symachus should
reply to the reproaches of his accusers. So we find the
following at that place, "Having been deprived of [the
regalia] of his dignity in the Roman synod, Pope
Symachus is ordered to be returned to his former state
that he might come to defend himself and, if it seemed
properly done in this way, to reply to the
representations of his accusers. The matter seemed
worthy of the greatest number of priests and was
deserving of this process; when it was later being
arranged how he should be called to account the pope
got up to plead his case, but was impeded by his
rivals." We gather from these words that Pope
Symachus was arraigned and was able to be arraigned
on the judgement of the synod. The gloss on dist. 17,
para. Hinc etiam explains on what charge he was
arraigned when it says [s. v. immunia, col.72] that
Pope Symachus "was first arraigned for heresy but
when the false accusation of his accuser became clear
he was later absolved." It is clear from this, therefore,
that the synod reckoned that Pope Symachus was able
to be accused of heresy; and consequently a pope can
become a heretic.

Sextum exemplum adducitur de Leone quem convicit

[See Significant Variants, para. 28.] A sixth example

170

