Second, because a conditional protestation benefits not at all the one who makes the protestation; therefore
ignorance or simplicity does not excuse, because in definitions and objects [text?] of faith Catholics protest thus
to suggest that if they are in error it is not through any pertinacity, but from ignorance and simplicity alone. And
therefore such protestation in definitions avails only when the person protesting can be excused by simplicity or
ignorance. But that this man cannot be excused in this way is plain and certain. First, not by simplicity, because
he speaks from much deliberation, meditation and study, and with this he preaches the often mentioned heresy.
Nor can he be excused by ignorance, because ignorance of things one is bound to know does not excuse; but this
man is bound to know that it is Catholic truth that the souls of the saints in heaven clearly see God, because he is
bound to know this explicitly, since it is a truth published among all Catholics; therefore he cannot be excused
by ignorance.
Third, it is proved as follows. By means of a protestation common to Catholics and heretics a person erring
against a Catholic truth that he is bound to believe explicitly cannot be excused; this sufficiently appears from
what has gone before; but such a protestation is common to Catholics and unknowing heretics, for all, both the
former and the latter, protest or can protest that they are ready to revoke the whole if they have said anything
against the faith; and this man in this case errs against a Catholic truth that he is bound to believe explicitly;
therefore by such a protestation he is by no means excused, and such a protestation does not benefit him.
Fourth, as follows. If such a protestation were to benefit him, by the same argument it would benefit anyone
denying any Catholic truth whatever. But this is manifestly false, for then it would be permissible for anyone to
preach in public that Christ did not suffer or die and was not born of the Virgin, and that there is no other
everlasting life after this life, and that good works are of no benefit after death, and that God should not be loved,
and that one should not obey God; and it would be permissible to preach similar things without fear of heretical
wickedness, if the preacher were to make protest saying, "I say and hold these things, but it is not my intention to
say anything against the faith, and if I have said anything, I revoke the whole from now". But this is obviously
absurd. Therefore, just as such a protestation cannot benefit those people, so neither can it benefit this man.
CHAPTER 11
It continues:
If anyone, great or small, has anything in favour of the affirmative conclusion, let him safely give it to me and I
will receive it willingly.
Here it is narrated that the inventor of the aforesaid error pretends in deceptive and ambiguous words that he is
not pertinaciously zealous in favour of the above assertion. But it is [eius: est?] deception when he says, "If
anyone, great or small, has anything in favour of the affirmative conclusion, let him safely give it to me", and
this is evidently weighed by his actions. For from the persecution he inflicts on those who are zealous for
Catholic truth it is plain and certain that anyone who gave him anything in favour of the truth opposed to his
error would expose himself to danger and confusion, because those who are zealous for and defend Catholic
truth lose his favour and incur his indignation (though sometimes perhaps he cleverly hides his indignation
towards some people). This is a matter of fact, therefore it should not be shown by argument or authority but by
his actions and deeds.
However, when he says, "I will receive it willingly", he tries to hide his deceptiveness and malice by ambiguous
words. For someone can willingly receive arguments against his opinion, either for disproving [them], or for
answering [them], or for investigating things that disagree with his opinion, or for analysing, or for proving [the
truth]. It seems probable that he would willingly receive arguments in favour of the affirmative side in the first
three ways, namely to disprove them, or to reply to them, or to investigate things that disagree with his error and,
if he sees an opportunity, destroy and confound them. But for analysing and proving, his deeds show that he does
not willingly receive arguments against his error.
CHAPTER 12
It continues:
And concerning this he straightway sought that a public instrument be made, and the consistory was dissolved.
Here it is narrated finally that he sought that a public instrument should be made of his revocation or
protestation. But it is clear from what has gone before that, in accordance with the above argumentation, such an
instrument cannot support him, because the above protestation can not benefit him at all.
All the things written above that I have offered of my own, as also all my statements and writings, I submit to the
correction and emendation of him or those concerned, ready, if I learn that I have said anything contrary to the
faith, to revoke it in every way. If however I have reported his assertions or actions otherwise than is true, let it
be imputed to the reporters.

537

