subiectus quantum est ex ordinatione Christi, quia, ut jurisdiction on the basis of Christ's dispensation,
dicunt, Christus quantum ad temporalem iurisdictionem because, they say, Christ, as to temporal jurisdiction, did
nullum
apostolum
a
iurisdictione
temporali not exempt any apostle from the emperor's temporal
imperatorum exemit sed omnes voluit in huiusmodi jurisdiction, but wanted them all to be subordinated in
principibus secularibus esse subiectos, in cuius signum such matters to secular rulers, indicating this [Matthew
ipse solvit pro propria persona tributum. Alii autem 17:23-26] by his own personal payment of tribute.
dicunt quod imperator in quantum gerit personam Others however say [Marsilius, I.xv.4; II.viii.7-8; II.x.8]
populi christiani in omnibus tam spiritualibus quam that the emperor, in so far as he represents the Christian
temporalibus est superior papa et iudex ordinarius eius. people, is the pope's superior and his normal judge in all
areas, spiritual as well as temporal.
Discipulus: De iurisdictione pape et imperatoris Student: Move right through this discussion of the
pertranseas quia in tractatu De dogmatibus Joh. 22-i de temporal jurisdiction of pope and emperor, for I shall
hoc plures tibi questiones movebo.
raise a number of questions with you about the issue in
the treatise Concerning the doctrines of John XXII.
Magister: Tu forsitan aliter accipis iurisdictionem Master: Perhaps you construe temporal jurisdiction
temporalem quam isti.
differently from them.
Discipulus: Accipio iurisdictionem temporalem pro illa Student: I understand temporal jurisdiction to mean
cui aliquis est subiectus ratione prediorum que de what someone is subject to by reason of the estates
imperatore tenet.
which he holds from the emperor.
Magister: Aliter accipiunt ipsi.
Master: These opponents interpret it differently.
Discipulus: Quomodo.
Student: In what way ?
Magister: Dicunt quod iurisdictio temporalis non solum Master: They say [Marsilius, I.xvii] that temporal
respicit predia et temporales divitias sed etiam personas, jurisdiction affects not only properties and wordly riches
quia omnes persone in dominio alicuius principis but also persons; for all persons who reside within the
commorantes sive sint divites sive pauperes iurisdictioni dominion of some ruler, whether they be rich or poor,
principis sunt subiecte ita quod si deliquerint eos debet are subject to the ruler's jurisdiction, so that if they break
condigna animadversione punire nisi per principem vel the law he has the duty to punish them with appropriate
superiorem alium sint exempte.
measures, unless they have been exempted by him or by
some other superior.
Discipulus: Video quid per iurisdictionem temporalem Student: I see what they understand by temporal
intelligunt sed ignoro que spiritualia vocant.
jurisdiction but am ignorant of what they refer to as
spirituals. [See also 3.2 Dial. 2.4]
Magister: Spiritualia vocant ea que religioni christiane Master: They call spirituals those matters which are
sunt propria, que in nulla alia secta sunt reperta nec ad particular to the Christian religion, which are found in
legem nature sunt spectantia, sicut que pertinent ad no other sect nor belong to the law of nature, such as
sacramenta ecclesiastica dispensanda et ad causas fidei what pertains to the administration of ecclesiastical
terminandas, et in criminibus que directe contra sacraments and to final decisions about causes of faith ,
christianam religionem committuntur. De huiusmodi and what is associated with crimes that are committed
enim imperator nisi sicut ceteri christiani se intromittere directly against the Christian religion [John of Paris, ch.
non debet, quia imperator christianus ratione sue 12]. The emperor ought not to involve himself in such
dignitatis maiorem potestatem vel iurisdictionem issues save to the extent that other Christians do. For a
nullatenus habet quam habuerunt imperatores pagani, Christian emperor does not at all on the basis of his
illis enim imperatores christiani successerunt, et ideo office enjoy greater power or jurisdiction than pagan
idem ius cum illis et non aliud ratione imperii possidere emperors did. Christian emperors are their successors
noscuntur. Quia igitur de huiusmodi spiritualibus se and thus are known on account of the empire to have a
intromittere ad imperatores paganos minime pertinebat, right identical to that of their predecessors and not some
nec ad imperatorem christianum in quantum imperator different right. Therefore since it in no way pertained to
est talia spectant.
pagan emperors to involve themselves in spirituals of
this kind, neither are such the concern of a Christian
emperor in his capacity as emperor [ Ockham, De
imperatorum et pontificum potestate, ch. 12].
Discipulus: Ergo secundum istos si papa homicidium, Student: Therefore according to these opponents if a
furtum, adulterium, et consimilia crimina que pope were to commit murder, theft, adultery and similar
imperatores et reges pagani punire solebant crimes, which pagan emperors and kings were wont to
committeret, imperator ipsum punire valeret.
punish, the emperor would be in a position to punish him
?
Magister: Hoc nonnulli concedunt licet dicant quidam Master: Many concede this [John of Paris, ch.13;
eorum quod non deberet eum deponere nisi Marsilius, II.viii.7-8], although some of them say that
280

