how this came to pass.
Discipulus: Videtur quod Athanasius compromittendo Student: It appears that by selecting a pagan arbitrator
in paganum se et fidem catholicam magno periculo Athanasius subjected both himself and the catholic faith
exponebat, quod tamen debuit evitare.
to great danger, and this he definitely should have
avoided.
Magister: Respondetur quod Athanasius periculo Master: The answer is that Athanasius did not expose
probabili se minime exponebat. Sciebat enim paganum himself to any probable danger. For he knew that this
illum virum esse magne fidelitatis et constantie ac pagan was a man of great loyalty and firmness of
eximie intelligentie, qua ordinem assertionum quarum character as well as of outstanding intelligence, a man
una sequitur ex alia vel aliis, et etiam repugnantiam who knew how to grasp the meaningful relationship
assertionum quarum una alteri adversatur sciebat between assertions linked in logical sequence, and also
advertere, et ideo Athanasius sciens predictum paganum the inconsistency of assertions which contradicted each
virtutibus politicis et rationali scientia illustratum, ipsius other. And so Athanasius, knowing the aforementioned
iudicio modo predicto absque periculo probabili se pagan to be a virtuous citizen and distinguished logician,
commisit, licet non absque omni periculo committed himself to his judgement as earlier described,
qualitercunque
possibili.
Periculum
autem without probable danger though not without any possible
qualitercunque possibile nullus vitare tenetur, quia per danger whatsoever. But no one is obligated to avoid any
hoc a bonis impediretur permaximis. Esset enim similis kind of possible danger, because this would prevent the
illi de quo dicit Salomon Ecclesiasti 11: "qui observat doing of very good things. Indeed someone that cautious
ventum non seminat, et qui considerat nubes nunquam would resemble the person about whom Solomon stated
metet".
in Ecclesiastes 11: "he that observeth the wind shall not
sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap".
[Ecclesiastes 11:4]
Capitulum 23
Chapter 23
Discipulus: Ad principalem responsionem quam dedisti Student: I want to return to the principal response that
ad instantiam meam quod non est appellandum a papa you gave to my objection that one is not allowed to
pronuntiante diffinitive legem christianam esse falsam appeal from a pope definitively proclaiming the
volo redire et eam magis discutere. Cupio igitur audire Christian law to be false and to discuss this response
quare assertores predicti asserunt expedire quod a tali somewhat further. I would like, accordingly, to hear why
sententia pape heretici appelletur.
the aforementioned theorists assert that it is expedient to
proceed with an appeal from this judgement of a heretic
pope.
Magister: Huius dicti inter alias rationes tres Master: They assign three reasons, among others, for
assignantur. Prima est ut contra sententiam iniquam in this statement. The first is that a remedy be provided
causa fidei adhibeatur remedium quod consuevit contra against an unjust sentence in a case of faith similar to the
alias iniquas sententias adhiberi. Secunda est ut cum one provided against other kinds of unjust sentences.
maiori solempnitate iniqua sententia contra fidem The second is: so that an unjust sentence rendered
prolata catholicam impugnetur. Tertia est ut satisfaciat against the catholic faith be opposed with greater
simplicibus et iuristis qui forte non crederent aliquam solemnity. The third is: so that simple people and
posse licite impugnare sententiam iniquam contra fidem, lawyers might be reassured. Unless an appeal were
et huiusmodi impugnantem esse a catholicis issued against this sentence, they might perhaps not
defendendum, nisi contra eandem appellaret.
believe that it is permitted to oppose some unjust
sentence against the faith, and that the actual opponent is
to be defended by catholics.
Capitulum 24
Chapter 24
Discipulus: Intelligo rationes quare isti dicunt, quod Student: I understand the reasons why these theorists
nonnunquam expedit a tali sententia appellare, sed say that sometimes it is expedient to appeal from such a
nescio motiva eorum, quare dicunt quod non est judgement, but I am in the dark as to what moves them
absolute necessarium a tali sententia appellare. Ideo qua to say that it is not absolutely necessary to appeal from
ratione moventur enarra.
such a judgement. Do give an account of the reason that
influences them as to the latter view.
Magister: Quod non sit absolute necessarium a tali Master: Here is how they show that it is not absolutely
sententia appellare servando scilicet formam et puncta necessary to appeal from such a judgement, namely by
que in appellationibus secundum iura humana oportet observing the form and the details, which are usually
servare sic ostendunt. Non magis est necessarium observed in appeals according to human regulations.
appellare a sententia prolata contra legem Dei et fidem There is no greater necessity to appeal from a judgement
christianam quam a sententia prolata contra canones et rendered against the law of God and the Christian faith
leges humanas. Sed a sententia prolata contra canones et than from a judgement rendered against human laws and
313

