Discipulus Ista tantummodo probant quod talis
praesumitur
pertinax
et
haereticus.
Propter
praesumptionem autem non est aliquis damnandus nec
graviter puniendus.

Disciple They prove only that such a person is
presumed to be pertinacious and a heretic; on account
of a presumption, however, no one should be
condemned or severely punished.

Magister Saepe propter solam praesumptionem
violentam sententia etiam diffinitiva profertur. Unde et
Salomon, ut legitur 3 Regum 3, contendentibus duabus
mulieribus pro puero coram eo ex sola praesumptione
diffinitivam dedit sententiam. Sic dicunt quidam in
proposito quod ex praesumptione violenta negans
veritatem catholicam quam prius asserverat esse
catholicam est damnandus et tanquam haereticus
puniendus.

Master A sentence, even a definitive sentence, is
often pronounced solely on the basis of a violent
presumption. And thus Solomon, as we read in 3
Kings 3:[16-27], gave a definitive sentence on the
basis of a presumption alone when two women were
arguing before him over a child. So some people say
in the present case that one denying a catholic truth
which he had previously affirmed as catholic should,
on the basis of a violent presumption, be condemned
and punished as a heretic.

Capitulum 14

Chapter 14

Discipulus Ad alios modos convincendi errantes de
pertinacia et haeretica pravitate procede.

Disciple Go on to other ways of convicting of
pertinacity and heretical wickedness those erring.

Magister Alius modus de pertinacia convincendi
dicitur esse cum quis scienter negat doctrinam
sanctorum. Quidam enim affirmant quod talis est statim
pertinax et haereticus reputandus, aliis dicentibus quod
talis quamvis corrigi nolit non est pertinax nec
haereticus iudicandus.

Master Another [sixth] way of convicting of
pertinacity is said to be when someone knowingly
denies the teaching of the saints. For some people
assert that such a person should be regarded
immediately as pertinacious and a heretic, while
others say that even if he refuses to be corrected such
a person should not be judged as pertinacious and a
heretic.

Discipulus Haec difficultas dependet ex illa quam
supra tractavimus, an scilicet tenere assertiones
sanctorum sit necessarium ad salutem. Ideo circa eam
hic nolo insistere, sed ad alium modum de pertinacia
quempiam convincendi festina.

Disciple This difficulty depends on the [question]
which we discussed above, namely, whether it is
necessary to salvation to hold to the assertions of the
saints. I do not want you to follow that up here,
therefore, but hurry on to another way of convicting
someone of pertinacity.

Failure to accept lawful correction
Capitulum 15

Chapter 15

Magister Ille de pertinacia convincitur manifeste qui
correctus legitime se non corrigit nec emendat, suam
videlicet haeresim revocando. Hoc ex verbis Augustini
superius allegatis quae ponuntur 24, q. 3, c. Qui in
ecclesia colligitur evidenter. Quod etiam talis sit
pertinax iudicandus probatur aperte quia qui non est
paratus corrigi debet pertinax reputari; qui autem
correctus legitime haeresim suam non revocat non est
paratus corrigi; ergo talis est pertinax reputandus.

Master He is openly convicted of pertinacity
[seventh way] who does not correct and amend
himself once he has been corrected lawfully, namely
by retracting his heresy. This is clearly gathered from
the words of Augustine cited above and quoted in 24.
q. 3. c. Qui in ecclesia [col.998]. That such a person
should also be judged pertinacious is clearly proved
because he who is not ready to be corrected should be
regarded as pertinacious; he who does not retract his
heresy once he has been legitimately corrected,
however, is not ready to be corrected; such a person
should be regarded, therefore, as pertinacious.

Discipulus Quia istum modum de pertinacia
convincendi saepe audivi et alii sunt mihi omnino novi,

Disciple Because I have often heard about that way of
convicting of pertinacity and the others are quite new

128

