leges humanas non est necessarium appellare, teste canons. But it isn't necessary to appeal from a judgement
Gregorio nono qui, ut habetur Extra, De sententia et re rendered against human laws and canons, witness
iudicata, c. 1, ait: "sententia contra leges canonesve Gregory IX (we have this in Extra, De sententia et re
prolata licet non sit appellatione suspensa non potest iudicata, c. 1) who states: "a judgement rendered against
tamen subsistere ipso iure". Ubi dicit glossa: "sententia the laws or canons cannot indeed be legally valid even if
lata contra leges, id est ius constitutionis, ita quod hoc in it is not suspended by an appeal". [col. 393] The gloss
sententia exprimatur, nulla est ipso iure et citra states in this context: "a judgement rendered against the
appellationem rescinditur". Ergo multo magis sententia laws, i.e. against constitutional order, so that this is
lata contra fidem nulla est ipso iure absque omni expressed in the sentence, is invalid by law itself, and is
appellatione. Ergo non est necesse absolute appellare a cancelled without having recourse to an appeal". [col.
sententia lata contra catholicam fidem. Secundo sic. A 876] Therefore all the more is a judgement rendered
sententia que non potest transire in rem iudicatam nec against the catholic faith invalid by law itself, with no
valet firmitatem sententie obtinere non est absolute appeal being required. Therefore it is not absolutely
necessarium appellare. Hec enim ratio assignatur in necessary to appeal from a judgement rendered against
decretis (2 q. 6 par. Diffinitiva quoque ) quare a pluribus the catholic faith. Here is the second argument. It is not
sententiis non est necesse appellare, ubi sic habetur: "si absolutely necessary to appeal from a judgement, which
sententia lata fuerit contra res prius iudicatas, a quibus cannot be legally conclusive nor is capable of achieving
provocatum non est, sententia auctoritatem non the firmness of a genuine adjudication. This is indeed the
obtinebit, et ideo ab ea appellare non est necesse", et reason proffered in canon law (in 2 q. 6 # Diffinitiva) as
infra: "si plures iudices dati fuerint et unus tantum ex to why it isn't necessary to appeal from many sentences,
hiis pronunciasse proponitur, non videtur appellandi where we have it expounded as follows: "if the
necessitas fuisse, cum sententia firmitatem iure non judgement was rendered against matters previously
teneat". Ex quibus colligitur quod a sententia que non adjudicated from which no appeal was made, the
potest transire in rem iudicatam nec firmitatem sententie judgement will not acquire authority, and therefore it
obtinere non est necesse appellare. Sed sententia lata isn't necessary to appeal from it". [col. 482] And further
contra fidem non potest transire in rem iudicatam nec along: "if there were many judges and only one among
valet auctoritatem seu firmitatem sententie obtinere. them was seen to have made a pronouncement, it does
Ergo ab illa non est necessarium appellare. Tertio sic. In not appear that a necessity to appeal would have existed,
nulla causa contra quam nulla prescriptio currere potest since the judgement would not be conclusive by law".
est necesse appellare ab iniqua sententia. Sed contra [col. 482] One gathers from these texts that it is not
fidem nulla prescriptio currere potest quin sententia lata necessary to appeal from a judgement that cannot be
contra fidem catholicam revocetur quandocunque legally conclusive nor is capable of obtaining the
veritas fuerit manifesta, quia omne quod est fidei firmness of a genuine adjudication. But a judgement
contrarium orthodoxe vanum et irritum est habendum. rendered against the faith cannot be legally conclusive
Ergo a sententia lata contra fidem non est necesse nor can it possess the authority or the firmness of a
appellare.
genuine adjudication. Therefore it is not necessary to
appeal from such a judgement. Here is the third
argument. In no case against which no prescription may
run is it necessary to appeal from an unjust sentence. But
no prescription may run against the faith, and a sentence
rendered against the catholic faith would certainly be
revoked whenever the truth became manifest, because
everything which is opposed to orthodox belief is to be
considered false and invalid. Therefore it is not
necessary to appeal from a judgement rendered against
the faith.
Quarto sic. Iniqua sententia lata contra fidem non potest Here is the fourth argument. An unjust sentence rendered
esse magis privilegiata quam sententia lata contra against the faith cannot be more privileged than a
matrimonium. Sed sententia lata contra matrimonium judgement rendered against matrimony. But a judgement
tale privilegium non obtinet ut ab ea appellare sit rendered against matrimony is not privileged to the
necesse, quia licet a sententia lata contra matrimonium extent of making an appeal from it a matter of necessity,
non sit appellatum ipsa tamen revocanda est because even if a judgement rendered against matrimony
quandocunque fuerit ostensum fuisse iniquam, is not appealed, it must nevertheless be revoked
secundum quod colligitur manifeste ex sacris canonibus whenever evidence of its injustice comes to light, as we
Extra, De sententia et re iudicata, c. Lator et c. clearly gather from the sacred canons Extra, De
Consanguinei et quampluribus aliis. Hinc glossa sententia et re iudicata, c. Lator, [col. 394] and c.
predicto capitulo Lator notat dicens: "contra Consanguinei, [col. 395] and very many others. Hence
matrimonium non currit prescriptio (33 q. 5 Quod Deo ) the gloss to the cited chapter Lator makes this statement:
etiam si ab illa sententia non fuit appellatum, quia "prescription does not run against matrimony (33 q. 5
314

