consimilia tempore necessitatis cum non apparent whole or in part by the pope's false doctrine-and similar
(neque prelati neque alii) qui velint vel possint talia ones, are to be assessed works of spiritual charity.
operari, quilibet sive socius sive subditus qui Therefore in time of necessity any person, whether a
convenienter potest, ista debet proximis de necessitate subject or an associate, who may conveniently perform
salutis impendere. Ex quibus colligitur quod si such works, is bound by necessity of salvation to provide
predicatores et doctores seu magistri sive in sermonibus them to his neighbours, when there are none (prelates or
et lectionibus publicis sive per informationes occultas others) willing or able to do so. We gather from these
possunt aliquos vel aliquem a doctrina pape erronea considerations that if preachers and doctors or masters
revocare et non faciunt, nec apparet alius qui hoc faciat, are able, either through public sermons and lectures or by
sunt fautores heretice pravitatis, nec carent scrupulo secret communications, to dissuade some or someone
societatis occulte ex quo possunt et (non apparet alius from accepting a pope's false doctrine, their failure to do
qui velit et possit) manifesto facinori desinunt obviare. so when there is no one else available for the task makes
them aiders and abettors of heretical wickedness, nor are
they free from the suspicion of secret conspiracy since
they can prevent an obvious crime and do not (there is no
one else willing and able).
Discipulus: Quid si metu mortis tali facinori desinunt Student: What if they fail to prevent such a crime for
obviare.
fear of being killed.
Magister: Videtur quibusdam quod si probabiliter Master: It appears to some that if these preachers and
crederent quod possent aliquos a doctrina pape erronea doctors were to hold a probable belief that they might
revocare, nec probabiliter reputarent quod alio tempore, dissuade a number of people from accepting the pope's
si viverent, maiorem possent facere fructum, peccarent false doctrine, and if these preachers and doctors do not
mortaliter obmittendo metu mortis alios a doctrina pape surmise with probability that by remaining alive they
erronea revocare. Verumptamen propter metum mortis might reap a larger harvest at another time, they would
excusarentur
in
tantum
quod
sententiam commit a mortal sin by avoiding for fear of death to
excommunicationis
nequaquam
incurrerent, dissuade others from accepting the pope's false doctrine.
quemadmodum si quis inter sarracenos et infideles alios Nevertheless fear of death would excuse them to this
constitutus metu mortis negaret Christum, et extent that they would not incur a sentence of
veneraretur Machometum, peccaret mortaliter sed excommunication. Similarly, if someone living among
sententiam excommunicationis evaderet.
Moslems and other non-believers were to deny Christ for
fear of dying, and offer homage to Mohammed, he would
commit a mortal sin but escape a sentence of
excommunication.
Capitulum 49
Chapter 49
Discipulus: Inquisivimus de predicatoribus et Student: We have inquired of preachers and doctors
doctoribus si teneantur doctrinam pape erroneam whether they would be bound to reject the false doctrine
reprobare. Nunc dissere de illis predicatoribus et of a pope. Proceed now to treat of those preachers and
doctoribus qui impugnatores pape heretici improbarent doctors who would condemn or persecute or harass in
vel persequerentur aut quomodolibet infestarent.
whatever fashion the opponents of a heretic pope.
Magister: Circa hanc interrogationem videtur aliquibus Master: It appears to some that this question requires
distinguendum quod improbare impugnatores pape distinctions. There are two ways of condemning the
heretici contingit dupliciter. Uno modo eorum opponents of a heretic pope. One way is by attempting to
assertiones per auctoritates et rationes solummodo dissolve their contentions solely by authorities and
convincere satagendo, alio modo personis eorum arguments. Another way is by disparaging their persons
detrahendo, vel in perpera irrogando, aut persecutionem or inflicting wickednesses upon them, or by arranging for
quamlibet procurando, vel contra ipsos alios them to suffer any kind of persecution, or by provoking
provocando, seu eis per se vel per alios molestiam others against them, or by distressing them in whatever
quamlibet inferendo. Item, aut assertio pape erronea est fashion, directly or through others. Again, either the
dampnata explicite aut solummodo implicite. Item, si pope's false proposition is condemned explicitly or only
est dampnata explicite aut predicatores et doctores qui implicitly. Again, if it is condemned explicitly, either
non impugnant ipsam possunt faciliter scire quod those preachers and doctors who do not attack it may
assertio pape est dampnata explicite aut non possunt easily learn that the pope's proposition is condemned
hoc faciliter scire. Item, aut sciunt papam a viris in explicitly or they have no possibility of obtaining such
sacra pagina eruditis de certis articulis fortiter information. Again, either they know that the pope is
impugnari aut nesciunt.
being strongly attacked concerning certain propositions
by men learned in Holy Writ, or they do not know this.
Discipulus: Quomodo potest contingere quod aliqua Student: How can it happen that some false proposition
assertio pape erronea sit dampnata explicite et tamen of the pope is explicitly condemned and yet preachers
quod predicatores seu doctores hoc non possunt and doctors cannot know this with ease.
447

