concludes that defense must be provided to the
opponents of a heretic pope.
Undecima ratio talis est. Qui debet alteri auxilium et Here is the eleventh reason. He who must provide
consilium in aliqua causa impendere debet eidem assistance and counsel to another in some cause must
defensionem congruam exhibere. Catholicus autem provide the same with an appropriate defense. But a
debet impugnantibus papam hereticum auxilium et catholic must provide assistance and counsel to the
consilium impendere, aliter enim zelator fidei catholice opponents of a heretic pope, for otherwise he would not
nequaquam existeret. Ergo debet eis etiam defensionem show himself to be an ardent devotee of the catholic
impendere.
faith. Therefore he must likewise provide a defense for
them.
Duodecima ratio talis est. Quilibet tenetur defendere, si Here is the twelfth reason. Everyone is bound to defend,
potest, patientem quamcumque iniuriam. Ergo multo if possible, someone who suffers harm no matter what its
magis quilibet tenetur defendere, si potest, patientem nature. Therefore all the more is everyone bound to
iniuriam quia defendendo fidem catholicam papam defend, if possible, someone who suffers harm because
hereticum nititur impugnare. Consequentia est manifesta of attempted opposition to a heretic pope in defense of
et evidens, quia si patiens iniuriam est defendendus, the catholic faith. The consequence is clear and evident,
maxime defendendus est si propter iustitiam et for if someone suffering harm must be defended, he is to
catholicam fidem iniuriam noscitur sustinere. be defended above all if he is known to be sustaining
Antecedens autem auctoritatibus sanctorum patrum harm for the cause of justice and the catholic faith. The
videtur aperte probari. Ait enim Symachus papa ut antecedent proposition for its part appears to be
habetur dis. 83: "mortem enim languentibus probatur expressly proved by authorities of the holy fathers. For
infligere, qui hanc, cum possit, non excludit", et per Pope Symachus states in dis. 83: "he is proven to have
consequens iniuriam probatur inferre qui hanc cum inflicted death on the seriously ill who does not prevent
possit non excludit. Nullus autem debet iniuriam inferre. it when able to do so", [col. 293] and consequently he is
Ergo quilibet tenetur iniuriam patientem, cum possit, proved to have caused the harm who does not prevent it
defendere. Item, Ambrosius libro 'De officiis', et ponitur when he can. But no one must cause a harm. Therefore
dis. 86 c. Pasce, ait: "quisquis enim pascendo hominem everyone is obligated, if possible, to defend someone
servare poteris, si non pavisti, occidisti". Ex quibus suffering harm. Again, Ambrose states in the book 'On
verbis colligitur quod ille dicitur occidere alium qui offices' (and this is recorded in dis. 86 c. Pasce): "for
sustentationem, cum potest, non exhibet corporalem. whoever, for if you, might have saved a man by feeding
Ergo similiter ille intelligitur iniuriam irrogare qui, cum him, you killed him if you did not provide nourishment."
potest, iniuriam non excludit. Et ita quilibet, si potest, [col. 302] One gathers from these words that someone
debet defendere iniuriam patientem. Item, Innocentius who does not provide bodily sustenance to another when
tertius,
ut
habetur
Extra,
De
sententia he can is said to be killing him. Therefore in similar
excommunicationis, c. Quante, asserit manifeste quod fashion someone is understood to be inflicting harm if he
"facientes et consentientes pari pena plectendos does not prevent it when he can. And thus everyone, if
canonica
condempnat
auctoritas,
eos
etiam he can, must defend someone who suffers harm. Again,
delinquentibus favere interpretans, qui, cum possunt, Innocent III asserts evidently in Extra, De sententia
manifesto facinori desinunt obviare". Ex quibus verbis excommunicationis, c. Quante that "canonical authority
datur intelligi quod qui proximum ab inferenda iniuria condemns those who do the deed and those who consent
non defendit, cum potest, est pari pena cum iniuriante to the deed as meriting the same punishment, and also
plectendus. Ita quilibet, cum potest, patienti iniuriam favours counting among delinquents those who fail to act
debet defensionem impendere.
against an obvious crime when they can". [col. 909] One
gathers from these words that he who can but does not
defend his neighbour from impending harm is to receive
a punishment equal to that of the harm's perpetrator.
Thus, where possible, everyone must provide defense to
someone who suffers harm.
Capitulum 42
Chapter 42
Discipulus: Auctoritates predicte de solis iudicibus vel Student: The cited authorities must be understood as
prelatis habentibus super alios potestatem debent applying only to judges or to prelates who have authority
intelligi, non autem de illis qui potestatem vel over others, but they do not apply to those who have no
iurisdictionem super iniuriantes nullam habent. Quod authority over the perpetrators of harm. It seems that this
pluribus modis videtur posse probari. Primo autem hoc can be proved in many ways. And the authority of
auctoritate beati Augustini que ponitur 23 q. 4 c. Forte blessed Augustine, which is recorded in 23 q. 4 c. Forte,
ostenditur. Ait enim: "forte in populo Dei stat iuxta te shows this first of all. He says this: "perhaps among the
avarus, raptor, inhians rebus alienis, quem nosti talem, people of God there stands next to you a greedy miser, a
et fidelis est, vel potius fidelis vocatur. Non eum potes robber, who lusts after what belongs to others, and you
de ecclesia pellere, non habes aliquem aditum know his character, and he happens to be a believer, or
336

