vocabulo appellationis, et propter hoc in assertione first and second acception of the word "appeal", and that
predicta est addita modificatio memorata. Necesse est is why the mentioned modification was added to the
tamen appellare tertio modo vel quarto a sententia pape assertion we are discussing. It is, however, necessary to
heretica quando scitur esse heretica, quia talis sententia appeal in the third or fourth sense of the term from a
est impugnanda et qui scit eam esse hereticam facto heretical judgement of the pope known to be such,
debet ostendere quod reputat eam hereticam.
because such a judgement must be opposed, and he who
knows it to be heretical must indicate by some action
that he considers it to be such.
Discipulus: Nunquid solus ille contra quem lata est talis Student: But is it not a fact that only he against whom
sententia tenetur appellare taliter ab eadem.
such a judgement has been rendered is obligated to
appeal from it in the manner described.
Magister: Respondetur quod non solus ille sed quilibet Master: The answer is that not only this individual, but
catholicus sciens talem sententiam esse hereticam every catholic who knows the judgement to be heretical
appellare debet, quia aliter esset fautor pape heretici.
is obligated to appeal, because otherwise he would be
aiding and abetting a heretical pope.
Discipulus: Nunquid tenetur infra certum tempus taliter Student: Is he bound to appeal in this manner within a
appellare.
specified time frame.
Magister: Respondetur quod non est tempus sibi Master: The answer is that he is not constrained by a
determinatum, quia non oportet taliter appellare ne specific time frame, because the appeal is not intended to
sententia transeat in rem iudicatam sed ne appellans prevent the judgement from becoming legally
favere heretico videatur.
conclusive. It is rather made so that the appellant will not
be seen to be favouring a heretic.
Capitulum 28
Chapter 28
Discipulus: Ex his coniicio quod talis modus appellandi Student: From this I conclude that this method of
tractari habet cum de fautoribus hereticorum exquisite appealing is slated for discussion when we extensively
inquiretur, ideo de hoc supersedeas et indica quomodo inquire about the aiders and abettors of heretics.
aliter respondetur ad instantiam qua probavi quod a Therefore abstain from further focus on this issue, and
papa pronuntiante fidem catholicam esse falsam non est indicate how one responds otherwise to the objection by
aliquatenus appellandum. Dixisti enim quod ad illam which I proved that an appeal from a pope who declares
instantiam duplex datur responsio. Cum enim the catholic faith to be false must in no way be issued.
tractaverimus unam, dic aliam.
For you mentioned that two responses are given to this
objection. Since we have dealt with one of these
responses, proceed to state the other.
Magister: Dicitur quod a tali sententia necesse est Master: The second response is that from such a
appellare in forma communi appellandi et infra tempus sentence it is necessary to issue a standard appeal within
statutum a iure, quia aliter non audiretur quis contra the time frame specified by law, because otherwise a
sententiam pape si ipsam postea satageret impugnare. person would not be granted a hearing against the pope's
Pro hac autem assertione potest taliter allegari. Qui a sentence if he were to subsequently attempt to oppose it.
sententia iniqua infra tempus statutum a iure negligit And in support of this assertion one may argue as
appellare per interpretationem iuris late sententie parere follows. He who neglects to appeal from an unjust
videtur (Extra, De sententia et re iudicata, c. Quod ad sentence within the legally established time frame is
consultationem). Qui autem sententie paret ipsam deemed in the eyes of the law to have obeyed the
impugnare non potest, quia quod semel approbatum est proferred judgement (Extra, De sententia et re iudicata,
postea reprobari non potest (dis. 4 In istis et 8 q. 2 c. Quod ad consultationem). [col. 400] But he who obeys
Dilectissimi). Ergo qui non appellat infra tempus a judgement may not proceed to oppose it because that
statutum a iure postea non auditur, et ita appellare est which has once been approved cannot subsequently be
necesse si quis unquam voluerit sententiam pape rejected (dis. 4 In istis [col. 5] and 8 q. 2 Dilectissimi).
hereticam impugnare. Secundo sic. Appellationis [col. 598] Therefore he who does not appeal within the
remedium est ad presidium innocentie institutum (Extra, time frame established by law is not granted a hearing
De appellationibus, Cum speciali). Ergo quanto magis afterwards, and it is thus necessary to appeal if one will
innocentia impugnatur tanto magis necessarium est ever want to oppose the pope's heretical judgement. The
appellationis remedium. Sed quando papa pronuntiat second argument is this. The remedy of an appeal exists
diffinitive contra catholicum fidem christianam esse for the protection of innocence (Extra, De
falsam, maxime innocentia impugnatur. Ergo tunc appellationibus, Cum speciali). [col. 437] Therefore the
maxime necessarium est ad appellationis remedium greater is the assault on innocence, the more is the
convolare, et ita a tali sententia est necesse appellare. remedy of an appeal necessary. But when the pope
Tertio sic. Unoquoque utendum est ad usum ad quem definitively proclaims against a catholic that the
noscitur institutum. Appellatio autem est instituta ut Christian faith is false, innocence is assaulted in the
oppressi releventur, 2 q. 6 c.Omnis oppressus et c. Ideo, highest degree. Therefore that is when the necessity of
319

