pope is subject to the emperor, therefore, in
all those things in which he was subject
before his papacy.
Discipulus Papa etiam ante papatum non fuit
subiectus imperatori, quia fuit episcopus vel
clericus, et ideo imperator non fuit iudex
ipsius.

Student Even before his papacy the pope was
not subject to the emperor because he was a
bishop or cleric, and therefore the emperor
was not his judge.

Magister Ista responsio excluditur per hoc
primo, quod episcopi sunt subiecti imperatori.
Sed de isto forte postea queres. Ideo secundo
excluditur per hoc quod purus servus
imperatoris, etiam si tonsuram clericalem non
haberet, possit {*posset &Re} eligi in papam,
et ita cum imperator non debeat privari iure
suo per ecclesiam, papa talis remaneret
subiectus imperatori, et per consequens papa
ratione papatus non est exemptus a
iurisdictione imperatoris.

Master That reply is excluded firstly by the
fact that bishops are subject to the emperor.
But perhaps you will ask about this later.
Therefore it is excluded secondly by the fact
that a pure slave of the emperor, even if he
were not to have the clerical tonsure, could be
elected as pope, and so, since the emperor
should not be deprived of his right by the
church, such a pope would remain subject to
the emperor, and consequently the pope is not
exempt from the jurisdiction of the emperor
by reason of his papacy.

Discipulus Minor dignitas quam sit papatus,
liberat a patria potestate et etiam a potestate
dominica, ergo multo forcius electus in papam
eo ipso est liberatus ab omni iurisdictione
imperatoris.

Student A lesser dignity than the papacy
frees one from paternal power and even from
seignorial power; much more is it the case,
therefore, that one elected as pope is by that
very fact freed from all jurisdiction of the
emperor.

Magister Dicunt alii quod ista obiectio nichil
valet. Quod enim minor dignitas quam papatus
liberet a patria potestate et dominica, est ex
ordinacione humana non ex ordinacione
divina, et ita ex ordinacione imperatoris potest
electus {electio &Na} in papam eximi a
potestate inferiorum iudicum; sed non eximitur
ex ordinacione divina.

Master Some say that that objection is not at
all valid. For that a lesser dignity than the
papacy frees one from paternal and seignorial
power is by human regulation, not by divine
regulation, and so one elected as pope can by
the emperor's regulation be released from the
power of inferior judges; but he is not
released by divine ordinance.

Quod et {*etiam &Na} tali racione probatur:
non magis debet aliquis invitus privari iure suo
quod habet in aliquo, ut ei aliqua dignitas
ecclesiastica conferatur, sine qua potest salvari,
quam aliquis debeat privari iure suo quod
habet in filio, ut eidem filio conferatur
baptismus, sine quo non potest salvari. Sed

This is also proved by the following
argument. No more should someone who is
unwilling be deprived of the right which he
has in someone because some ecclesiastical
dignity, without which he can be saved, is
conferred on the latter, than someone should
be deprived of the right which he has in his

998

