inimicis in favorem fidei christiane. Tales tamen ad the malice or negligence or incompetence of others, or
testificandum non essent aliquatenus admittendi. Si due to some other cause. A possible response to the third
autem essent alii bone fame et non inimici, non essent objection is that if there was no one save a criminal and
predicti audiendi si a tali sententia appellarent, et tamen disgraced individual who would want to defend the
essent audiendi si propriam prosequerentur iniuriam, cause of faith against a pope proclaiming that the
quia non essent alii qui eorum iniuriam prosequerentur. Christian faith is false, it would be permitted to criminal
and disgraced individuals to appeal from such a sentence
and to follow up on their appeal, and such individuals
would have to be granted a legal hearing. Furthermore,
the same point in support of the Christian faith might be
made about its enemies. Nevertheless enemies of the
faith may not be accepted as witnesses. And if there
were others of good reputation and not enemies of the
faith, the enumerated categories of people would not
have the right to a legal hearing if they appealed from
such a sentence against the faith. But these reprobates
would have the right to be heard if they sought redress
for a personal injury, because there would be no others
seeking redress on their behalf.
Capitulum 33
Chapter 33
Discipulus: Satis disputavimus an liceat a sententia Student: We have discussed sufficiently whether it is
pape appellare si diffinitive pronuntiaret contra permitted to appeal from a pope if he were to issue a
catholicum fidem christianam esse falsam. Ideo ad definitive judgement against a catholic that the Christian
interrogationem aliam me converto, an videlicet a faith is false. Therefore I now turn to another question,
sententia quacunque pape qualemcunque heresim namely, whether it would be permitted to appeal from
continente liceat appellare. Unde de hoc unam vel plures any judgement of the pope containing any heresy
narra sententias.
whatsoever. Proceed to outline one or more opinions on
this issue.
Magister: Tenentes quod nunquam licet appellare a Master: Those who hold that it is never permitted to
papa dicerent quod nulli liceret a tali sententia appellare. appeal from the pope would say that no one would be
Alii autem dicerent quod ab omni sententia pape, permitted to appeal from such a judgement. But others
qualemcunque heresim contineat, sive dampnatam would say that it is permitted to appeal from any
explicite sive solummodo implicite, licet appellare.
judgement of the pope whatever type of heresy it
contains, and irrespective of whether the heresy is one
condemned explicitly or only implicitly.
Discipulus: Pro ista secunda sententia nitere allegare. Student: Attempt to argue in favour of the second
viewpoint.
Magister: Quod a tali sententia liceat appellare sic Master: Here is the proof that one may appeal from such
probatur. Ab omni sententia pape licet appellare quam a judgement. It is permitted to appeal from every
est licitum impugnare. Sed talem sententiam licet judgement of a pope that one may legitimately oppose.
impugnare quia licet omnem heresim dampnatam But it is permitted to oppose the judgement we are
explicite vel implicite impugnare. Ergo a tali sententia discussing because it is permitted to oppose every heresy
licet appellare. Secundo sic. Idem iuris est in parvis whether condemned explicitly or implicitly. Therefore it
quod in magnis (Extra, De prebendis, c. Maioribus, et is permitted to appeal from such a judgement. The
14 q. ultima, c. ultimo. Ergo idem iuris est in heresi que second argument is this. The same legal principle applies
videtur maxima et in heresi que videtur parva. Sed a to things both great and small (Extra, De prebendis, c.
papa diffinitive pronuntiante et determinante maximam Maioribus [col. 466] and 14 last q. last c.). [col. 744]
heresim esse tenendam, quod fides christiana videlicet Therefore the same legal principle applies to a heresy
est falsa, licet appellare. Ergo a papa heresim que which appears huge as to a heresy which appears tiny.
videtur minima pronuntiante diffinitive esse tenendam But one is permitted to appeal from a pope who
licet appellare, et ita quamcunque heresim sententiaverit definitively proclaims and determines that the greatest of
esset tenendam, liceret appellare. Tertio sic. Idem iuris heresies is a matter of obligatory belief, namely that the
est in parte quod in toto. Ergo idem iuris est de heresi Christian faith is false. Therefore it is permitted to appeal
que partem fidei catholice videtur destruere et de heresi from a pope who definitively proclaims that a heresy that
que totam negat catholicam fidem. Sed a papa appears tiny is a matter of obligatory belief. And thus it
pronuntiante totam fidem Christi esse falsam licet would be permitted to appeal no matter what kind of
appellare. Ergo a papa pronuntiante quamcunque heresy the pope were to decree as obligatory belief. Here
heresim cuicunque veritati catholice adversantem esse is the third argument. The same legal principle applies
tenendam licet appellare. Quarto sic. Ratio quare a papa both to a part and to the whole. Therefore the same legal
325

