Ergo a papa pronuntiante diffinitive legem christianam apostles appeal against the high priests when the latter
esse falsam non debent catholici appellare.
had rendered a sentence against the faith. Therefore
catholics must not appeal from a pope who definitively
proclaims that the Christian faith is false.
Magister: Ad istam instantiam potest dari duplex Master: A double response may be given to this
responsio. Prima est quod non est necessarium absolute objection. The first is that it is not absolutely necessary
appellare a papa iniquam contra fidem proferente to appeal from a pope who renders an unjust sentence
sententiam, propter quod multi fideles contra infideles et against the faith. This is why we find that many believers
hereticos inveniuntur minime appellasse. Sed sufficit in failed to appeal against unbelievers and heretics. For in
multis casibus sententiam pape vel alterius contra fidem many cases it is sufficient to simply oppose, detest and
simpliciter
impugnare,
detestari,
et
horrere abhor a sentence rendered against the faith by the pope
quemadmodum sancti patres absque appellatione or by someone else, just as the holy fathers used Holy
hereticorum assertiones iniquas per sacras litteras Writ to oppose the unjust assertions of heretics without
impugnarunt. Verumptamen aliquando expedit appellare bothering to appeal. Nevertheless, from time to time it is
exemplo beati Pauli qui ad Cesarem appellavit.
expedient to issue an appeal, following the example of
blessed Paul who appealed to Caesar.
Discipulus: Non videtur quod beatus Paulus Student: It does not appear that blessed Paul appealed
appellaverit pro causa fidei sed pro aliis criminibus que for a cause of faith, but rather for other crimes that were
sibi imponebantur mendaciter a iudeis, ergo per being falsely imputed to him by the Jews. Therefore one
exemplum beati Pauli probari non potest quod expediat cannot use the example of blessed Paul to prove that it is
pro causa fidei a papa heretico appellare.
expedient to appeal from a heretic pope for a cause of
faith.
Magister: Nonnullis apparet quod beatus Paulus pro Master: It appears to some that blessed Paul did appeal
causa fidei appellaverit, quod ex serie Actuum for a cause of faith, and that this is something that can be
Apostolorum videtur posse probari, nam 22 c. Actuum proved from various passages in the Acts of the
Apostolorum sic legitur scripsisse tribunus Claudius Apostles. Thus in chapter 23 (as we read it) here is what
presidi Felici de Paulo: "virum hunc comprehensum a the tribune Claudius wrote to the governor Felix
iudeis et incipientem interfici ab eis superveniens cum concerning Paul: "this man was taken of the Jews, and
exercitu eripui cognito quia Romanus est, volensque should have been killed of them: then came I with an
scire causam quam obiiciebant illi, deduxi eum in army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a
concilium eorum, quem inveni accusari de questionibus Roman. And when I would have known the cause
legis ipsorum nichil vero dignum morte aut vinculis wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into
habentem crimen". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod their council: whom I perceived to be accused of
super causa fidei inter iudeos et Paulum questio questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his
vertebatur. Pro ista autem causa Paulus postea charge worthy of death or of bonds". [Acts 23:27-29]
appellavit, ergo super causa fidei appellavit ad Cesarem. One gathers from these words that the issue in argument
Rursus 24 c. habetur expresse quod Paulus de causa between the Jews and Paul concerned a cause of faith.
fidei accusabatur a iudeis, unde et orator eorum And it is for this cause that Paul subsequently appealed,
accusans Paulum dixit: "invenimus hunc hominem therefore he appealed to Caesar about a cause of faith.
pestiferum et concitantem seditiones omnibus iudeis in Further, in chapter 24 we have it explicitly that Paul was
universo orbe et auctorem seditionis secte Nazarenorum being accused by the Jews about a cause of faith, whence
qui etiam templum violare conatus est". Ex quibus their spokesman, accusing Paul, stated: "we have found
verbis apparet quod Paulus accusabatur de fide. Et quod this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition
pro illa causa appellaverit patet cum 25 c. sic legatur: among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
"Paulo autem rationem reddente quoniam neque in ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, who also hath
legem iudeorum neque in templum neque in Cesarem gone about to profane the temple". [Acts 24:5-6] It
quicquam peccavi. Festus autem volens iudeis gratiam appears from these words that Paul was being accused
prestare, respondens Paulo dixit 'vis Hierosolymam about the faith. And that he appealed for this cause is
ascendere et ibi de hiis iudicari apud me', dixit autem clear, since one reads the following in chapter 25: "while
Paulus 'ad tribunal Cesaris sto, ubi me oportet iudicare. he [Paul] answered for himself, Neither against the law
Iudeis non nocui sicut tu melius nosti. Si enim nocui aut of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against
dignum morte aliquid feci non recuso mori, si vero Caesar, have I offended any thing at all. But Festus
nichil est eorum que hii accusant me nemo potest me willing to do the Jews a pleasure answered Paul and said,
illis donare. Cesarem appello'". Et post Festus loquens 'Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
de iudeis accusantibus Paulum ait: "Cum ergo huc those things before me?' Then said Paul 'I stand at
convenissent sine ulla dilatione sequenti die sedens pro Caesar's judgement seat where I ought to be judged: to
tribunali iussi adduci virum de quo cum stetissent the Jews I have done no wrong as thou very well
accusatores nullam causam deferebant de quibus ego knowest. For if I be an offender, or have committed any
suspicabar malum. Questiones vero quasdam de sua thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: but if there be
307

