against a Catholic faith that he is not bound to believe explicitly must be regarded as a heretic [something wrong
with this paragraph?].
Fourth, it is inferred from the above text that one who errs, but not pertinaciously, against a Catholic truth he is
not bound to believe, is not to be counted among the heretics. For Augustine says that such a person is by no
means to be counted among heretics, since such a person is ready to be corrected by the rule of Christian faith
and therefore does not err knowingly against faith; also he seeks the truth with careful solicitude and therefore
does not err against something he is bound to believe explicitly; also, because he is ready to be corrected, he
does not err pertinaciously, but errs from simplicity alone, or ignorance; and therefore he is not to be counted
among the heretics.
[5] Fifth, it must be noted that not only are those dogmatising though their words of preaching or by verbal
determinations, definitions and assertions that err against the truth convicted of pertinacity, but often they are
proved to be pertinacious also by deeds and works. For he who can by a violent presumption be convicted of
denying some Catholic truth that previously he acknowledged to be Catholic must be regarded as pertinacious;
again, he who having been lawfully corrected does not amend himself ---- again, he who molests or persecutes
those who defend the contrary Catholic truth and attack heretical wickedness; again, he who refuses to subject
himself to the correction and emendation of him or of those whom it concerns; again, he who regrets being
informed of the truth; again, he who has moved and compelled others by penalties or precepts or oaths to hold
his error; again, he who has compelled another to forswear the Catholic truth --- must be regarded as
pertinacious. For by these numberless things and by many others a person in error should be convicted of
pertinacity and counted among the heretics.
[6] Sixth, it must be noted that there is a difference between protestation and revocation. For a protestation (as it
relates to the present matter) can be made both by one who errs and by one who does not err against the faith.
For one who errs against the faith protests that he does not intend to say anything against the faith, and such a
protestation, if it is true, declares that the person making it does not knowingly err or say anything against the
faith; and in this he shows that he is not knowingly a heretic, but it does not support him so that he cannot be a
heretic unknowingly. One who does not err against faith also makes a protestation, showing by this that if he
were to err, he would err only from simplicity or ignorance, not from pertinacity. However, a revocation pertains
only to one who errs; for one who does not err should not revoke anything, but when one who errs against the
faith learns that he has erred, he should then make both a revocation and a protestation, because he ought to
confess that he has erred and he ought to promise that from now on he will by no means err against the faith.
[7] Seventh, it must be noted that is a revocation made by a person in error against the faith should not be
conditional, but ought to be pure and unconditional. For just as repentance for a sin committed should not be
conditional, but unconditional, so one who errs should not revoke his error under a condition, but absolutely.
Hence some who err against faith, and also some who do not err, are accustomed to revoke certain things
without any condition, saying, "If I have said or say anything against the faith, I revoke the whole". Such a
revocation should be called a protestation rather than a revocation, for such a person does not say that he has
erred, but says that he did not or will not say anything against the truth knowingly, and that if he learns that he
said anything against the faith he is ready to revoke. But there is a great difference between revocation and
protestation if one knew that one says something against the faith; for such a person does not revoke, but protests
that he is ready to revoke, if he learns that he has erred or does err against the faith.
[Arguments for theses]
Now that these things have been seen, the three points proposed at the beginning of this chapter must be proved.
The first is that the opinion of the often mentioned heresy (namely that the souls of the saints in heaven will not
see God clearly before the day of judgment) cannot in any way be excused by the words he has said here so that
he has not been and is not now a heretic. This is proved as follows. One holding a heresy contrary to a Catholic
truth he is bound to believe explicitly cannot be excused so that he has not been and is not now a heretic by
words that are common to Catholics and to obdurate and faithless heretics. For heretics uttering such words
common to Catholics and heretics imitate the way of an ape, which, while utterly without reason, in certain
gestures and actions tries to follow a rational animal, though it is not one (1, q. 1 [c. 70]). Thus those who are
heretics, while they are alienated from the faith, imitate Catholics in certain words, but in vain, because they are
not at all excused by such words. But the foregoing words which this man utters are common to Catholics and
obdurate and faithless heretics. For Catholics say, and also all unknowing heretics, however obdurate and
faithless, say, that it is not their intention to say anything against the faith, and if they have said anything, they
revoke the whole. For such a protestation and revocation, which must rather be called a protestation than a
revocation, all Sabellians, all Arians, all Donatists, all Greeks, and all the rest of the heretics, because they
regarded others opposed to them as heretics and regarded themselves as Catholics, would at least have protested;
yet they would not at all have been excused by such a protestation. Therefore, since this man holds a heresy
contrary to a truth he is bound to believe explicitly, he is not at all excused by such words so that he has not been
and is not now a heretic.
531

