nuncupari. Et istas veritates quas dicunt sapere
catholicam veritatem existimant ab omni fideli
tenendas saltem implicite.

catholic truth, taking "catholic truth" strictly, and from
other truths. And therefore they say that they can be
called catholic truths, taking "catholic truths"
liberally. And they believe that those truths which
they say smack of catholic truth should be held, at
least implicitly, by every believer.

Adhuc sunt aliae veritates quas dicunt solummodo in
facto consistere. Cuiusmodi sunt veritates de gestis
ecclesiae et sanctorum quae in gestis, cronicis, et
historiis fide dignis habentur, quas etiam asserunt a
fidelibus minime respuendas.

There are still other truths which they say exist only in
fact. Truths about the deeds of the church and of the
saints, which are found in accounts of deeds, in
chronicles, and in histories worthy of trust, are of this
kind, and they say that these too should not be
rejected by the faithful.

Ex his omnibus isti concludunt quod multae sunt
veritates catholicae quae nec in Scriptura Sacra
continentur explicite nec ex solis contentis in ea
possunt inferri. Multae etiam sunt veritates aliae quas
oportet certa credulitate fide tenere.

From all of this they conclude that there are many
catholic truths which are not explicitly contained in
sacred scripture and can not be inferred solely from
what is contained in it. There are also many other
truths [besides catholic truths] which it is proper to
hold with sure belief.

Capitulum 3

Chapter 3

Discipulus Satis diffuse narrasti istam secundam
sententiam, sed vellem scire an pro ipsa aliquae
auctoritates vel rationes valeant allegari, ad probandum
scilicet quod oporteat ad salutem firma credulitate
adhaerere aliquibus veritatibus quae nec in literis sacris
habentur nec ex solis contentis in eis necessario
argumento possunt inferri. Utrum autem tales veritates
stricte loquendo catholicae debeant reputari non curo
quod investiges.

Student You have set out that second opinion
copiously enough, but I would like to know whether
any texts or arguments can be brought forward for it,
to prove, that is, that it is necessary for salvation to
adhere with sure belief to some truths which are not
found in sacred writings and can not be inferred by
necessary argument solely from what is contained in
them. However, whether such truths should strictly
speaking be regarded as catholic I do not look to you
to investigate.

Magister Assertio de qua interrogas multis
auctoritatibus et rationibus videtur posse probari. Hoc
enim Innocentius tertius, ut habetur Extra, De
celebratione missarum, c. Cum Marthae, testari
videtur. Ait enim, "Multa tam de verbis quam de factis
dominicis invenimus ab evangelistis omissa, quae
apostoli vel supplevisse verbo vel facto expressisse
leguntur." Et infra, "Credimus igitur quod formam
verborum, sicut in canone reperitur, et a Christo
apostoli et ab ipsis eorum acceperint successores." Ex
his verbis colligitur quod quamvis forma conficiendi
sacramentum eucharistiae nequaquam reperiatur
secundum se totam in Scriptura Divina, tamen quod
illam formam Christus tradiderit est credendum. Hoc
etiam beatus Augustinus, sicut allegatum est supra,
expresse sentire videtur, cum dicit, "Palam est quod in
re dubia ad fidem valeat catholicae ecclesiae auctoritas,
quae ab ipsis fundatissimis sedibus apostolorum usque
ad hodiernum diem succedentium sibimet episcoporum
serie et tot populorum consensione firmatur." His
verbis datur intelligi ut videtur quod ad fidem
faciendam fidem sufficit auctoritas ecclesiae absque
Scriptura Divina.

Master The assertion about which you are asking
seems provable by many texts and arguments. For
Innocent III seems to attest to it, as we find in Extra,
De celebratione missarum, c. Cum Marthae [col.636].
For he says, "We find many things omitted by the
evangelists both about the words and the deeds of the
Lord which, as we read, the apostles either supplied in
words or expressed in their deeds.... Therefore we
believe that the form of words, as it is found in the
canon [of the mass], was received by the apostles
from Christ and by their successors from them." We
gather from these words that although the form of
consecrating the sacrament of the eucharist is not
found in divine scripture fully as it is, yet it should be
believed that Christ handed on that form. As was
argued above, Augustine also seems expressly to
believe this, since he says [dist. 11, c.9; col.25], "It is
clear that in a doubtful matter the authority of the
catholic church avails for faith, an authority which is
strengthened by the sees founded by the apostles, by
the series of bishops who have succeeded them up to
today and by the agreement of so many people." We
are given to understand by these words that it seems

28

