communicandum modo predicto, quod etiam holds from human law that there is to be no
corporaliter servari debet quando absque perniciosa communication as described with a heretic pope, a duty
turbatione fidelium servari potest, eo quod nulli heretico which must also be observed with respect to physical
est communicandum modo predicto. Item, ex iure contact, when this can be done without harmful
humano habetur quod si papa vel dominus temporalis disturbance to the faithful, because there is to be no
alicuius populi fiat hereticus, totus populus a contact of the type described with any heretic. Again,
iurisdictione tam pape quam domini temporalis we have it from human law that if the pope or the
absolvitur, teste Gregorio nono qui, ut habetur Extra, De temporal lord of some people becomes a heretic, the
hereticis, cap. ultimo, ait: "absolutos se noverint a debito entire populace is released from the jurisdiction of both
fidelitatis hominii et totius obsequii, quicunque lapsis the pope and of the temporal lord, witness Gregory IX,
manifeste in heresim aliquo pacto, quacunque firmitate who states (as we discover in Extra, De hereticis, c.
vallato, tenebantur astricti". Ex iure autem naturali, non ultimo) : "Let any know who were duty bound by any
quidem quod fuisset tempore nature institute, sed quod agreement, however strongly confirmed, to individuals
est pro tempore nature lapse, habetur quod populus obviously fallen into heresy, that they are released from
propter perfidiam alicuius qui non est superior eo, locum the debt of human obedience and from any respectful
aut patriam relinquere non tenetur. Ex quibus deference whatever". [c. 16, cols. 789-790] While from
concluditur quod si papa fiat hereticus, et dominus natural law (indeed not the natural law which would
temporalis faverit eidem, populus iurisdictionem saltem have regulated our deeds had our original nature
aliqualem obtinet super papam hereticum, quia ex quo developed historically, but the natural law which exists
papa hereticus est iure divino papatu privatus, non est for the period of fallen human nature) we deduce that
superior populo ubi moratur. Iure autem humano the populace is not obligated to abandon its place of
populus pape heretico communicare non debet, ergo residence or its homeland because of the faithlessness of
debet papam hereticum devitare. Iure autem naturali non someone who is not the people's superior. From these
tenetur propter papam hereticum patriam aut locum various points, one concludes that if the pope becomes a
deserere vel relinquere. Ergo potest papam hereticum, heretic, and the temporal lord favours him, the populace
ne eidem communicet, de loco suo expellere vel eum in obtains at least a certain jurisdiction over the heretic
custodia detinere.
pope, because, based on the fact that a heretic pope is
deprived of the papacy by divine law, he is not the
superior of the people in his area of residence. And by
human law the populace must not communicate with the
heretic pope, therefore it must avoid contacting the
heretic pope. Finally, by natural law a populace is not
bound to desert or to abandon its country or territory
because of a heretical pope. Therefore the populace is
entitled to expel the pope from its territory, or to place
him under detention, so as to avoid having to
communicate with him.
Discipulus: Ista ratio non procedit nisi papa hereticus se Student: This reason carries weight only if a heretic
ingereret communioni populi, ergo si non ingerit se pope involves himself in active communion with the
communioni populi, populus nullam iurisdictionem populace. Therefore if he does not seek such active
habet super eum.
contact, the populace possesses no jurisdiction over him.
Magister: Dicitur quod sufficit quod per rationem Master: The response is that it suffices to prove by
predictam probaretur populum in aliquo casu means of the stated reason that the populace
iurisdictionem
aliquam
(extendendo
nomen occasionally obtains a certain jurisdiction over a heretic
iurisdictionis ad quamcunque potestatem expellendi vel pope, stretching the term "jurisdiction" to include any
etiam aliquem detinendi) super papam hereticum power to expel or even to detain someone, because the
obtinere, quia dicitur quod ex tali iurisdictione populi contention is that from such a jurisdiction of the people
super papam hereticum multiplicem contingit inferre.
over a heretic pope a broader one may be inferred.
Discipulus: Causa brevitatis, nolo quod ex iurisdictione Student: For the sake of brevity, I do not wish any
predicta aliqua alia inferantur, sed dic secundum other matters to be inferred from the jurisdiction being
predictam opinionem, si papa hereticus voluerit discussed. But answer the following on the basis of the
recedere, an populus debeat eum dimittere liberum abire, stated opinion: if the heretic pope should decide to
an eum tenetur in firma custodia detinere.
leave, must the populace allow him to depart in
freedom, or is it bound to detain him in firm custody.
Magister: Respondetur quod populus tenetur eum in Master: The answer is that the populace is bound to
firma custodia detinere, cuius ratio assignatur talis. Non detain him in firm custody, and the following reason is
minus debet unaqueque persona et multitudo fidelium advanced to explain this. Each and every person and
esse sollicita de salute spirituali proximorum quam multitude of believers must be no less concerned about
corporali, secundum quod ex verbis beati Augustini que the spiritual salvation of their neighbours than about
466

