tantummodo qui sunt super alios potestatem habentes, those who have power over others. Preachers and doctors
quales non sunt predicatores et doctores nisi fuerint are not in this category unless they happen to be prelates.
prelati.
Magister: Dicunt quidam quod hic erras aperte quia Master: Some say that here you are clearly wrong,
auctoritas illa et consimiles debent intelligi non solum because this authority and similar ones must be
de prelatis sed etiam de sociis et subiectis, quod primo understood as applying not only to prelates but also to
per decretalem supra allegatam (Extra, De homicidio, associates and subjects. This may be evidently proved, to
Sicut) videtur aperte probari. Conditor enim decretalis begin with, by the decretal Extra, De homicidio, Sicut,
illius, scilicet Alexander tertius, loquitur de occisoribus which was used in argument earlier. Indeed the author of
beati Thome Cantuariensis et de illis qui associaverunt this decretal, namely Alexander III, speaks of the killers
eosdem quorum diversi diversimode culpabiles of blessed Thomas of Canterbury and of those who
extiterunt. De quibusdam autem eorum dicit in hec collaborated in this crime with varying degrees of
verba: "illi etiam, qui non, ut ferirent, sed, ut culpability. And concerning some of these collaborators
percussoribus opem ferrent, si forte per aliorum Alexander states the following words: "and those also
violentiam impedirentur, paulo minori debent pena must receive a slightly lesser punishment who were there
mulctari, quia, cum scriptum sit, qui potuit hominem not to carry out the deed, but to assist the killers should
liberare a morte et non liberavit, eum occidit, constat they perhaps have been impeded by the force of others;
ipsos ab homicidii reatu immunes non esse, qui for, as Scripture says, 'he who can free a man from death
occisoribus opem contra alios prestare venerunt, nec and does not, slays him' [echo of Proverbs 24:11]. It
caret scrupulo societatis occulte, qui cum possit stands that those who came to assist the killers against
manifeste facinori desinit obviare". Ex quibus verbis others are not free from the guilt of homicide, nor is
colligitur quod Alexander tertius quasi dupliciter suspicion of involvement in secret conspiracy out of
probare conatur quod qui occisoribus opem prestare place when someone who can, fails to act against an
venerunt a reatu homicidii minime sunt immunes. obvious crime"[col. 795]. We gather from these words
Primo per illud 'qui potuit hominem liberare etc.', that Alexander III is in effect attempting to prove twice
secundo per illud 'nec caret scrupulo etc.' Ergo over that those who came to assist the killers are not free
utrumque illorum dictorum, scilicet 'qui potuit from the guilt of homicide. First by this text: 'he who can
hominem liberare etc.' et 'nec caret scrupulo etc.' de hiis free a man etc.', and then by this one: 'nor is suspicion of
qui occisoribus opem prestare venerunt debet intelligi. involvement etc.' Therefore each of these statements,
Illi autem non erant prelati occisorum nec superiores namely 'he who can free a man etc.', and 'nor is suspicion
militibus qui erant occisores sed errant socii vel famuli of involvement etc.' must be understood of those who
aut subditi eorumdem. Ergo tales auctoritates 'qui potuit came to assist the killers. But these were neither the
hominem liberare etc.,' 'nec caret scrupulo etc.' et prelates of the killers nor the superiors of the soldiers
consimiles non solum de prelatis et superioribus et who were the killers: they were their associates, or
super alios potestatem habentibus sed et de omnibus attendants, or servants. Therefore such authorities as 'he
debent intelligi, quod verum est pro tempore who can free a man etc.', 'nor is suspicion of involvement
necessitatis, cum non apparet alius in promptu qui velit etc.' and similar ones must be understood not only of
et valeat proximum a periculo liberare.
prelates and superiors and of such as have power over
others, but of all and sundry. This is true in time of
necessity, when a specific someone willing and able to
free a neighbour from danger is not readily available.
Quod etiam tales auctoritates 'qui potuit etc.' et 'nec And that such authorities as 'he who can etc.' and 'nor is
caret scrupulo societatis occulte etc.' de sociis et de suspicion of involvement in secret conspiracy etc.' must
omnibus debeant intelligi probatur secundo sic. Non be understood of associates and of all others is secondly
minus tenetur quilibet socius et subditus vel prelatus proved thus. A given associate and subject or prelate is
subvenire necessitati spirituali proximi quam corporali. no less bound to support a neighbour's spiritual necessity
Sed quilibet tempore necessitatis, ubi non apparet alius than his physical necessity. But anyone, at a critical
qui proximo subveniat, tenetur opera misericordie moment, when no one else is available to support a
corporalia proximo, si potest, impendere. Ergo multo neighbour, is bound to provide charitable physical
magis quilibet subditus, socius et prelatus opera assistance to the neighbour if he can. Therefore all the
misericordie spiritualia, si convenienter potest cum non more is any subject, associate, and prelate, bound to
apparet alius qui subveniat, tenetur tempore necessitatis provide charitable assistance of a spiritual kind to a
proximo exhibere. Manifesto autem facinori obviare neighbour in time of necessity, if he can do this
cum quis convenienter potest, proximum ne doctrina conveniently, when no one else is there to provide such
pape heretici inficiatur erronea preservare, regionem support. But these actions-preventing an obvious crime
totam vel pro parte doctrina erronea pape infectam per when one can do this conveniently, protecting a
sermones , informationes, exhortationes et scripturas neighbour lest he be corrupted by the false doctrine of a
catholicas expurgare, et consimilia, sunt inter opera heretic pope, purifying through sermons, informations,
misericordie spiritualia computanda. Ergo ad ista et exhortations and catholic writings a region infected in
446

