aliqualiter dubitandum sed quia totum maius est sua catholics who have existed from the times of the
parte. Ecclesia igitur que est maioris auctoritatis quam prophets and the apostles up till now is worthy of
evangelista est illa ecclesia cuius auctor evangelii pars greater belief than the gospel, not because there should
esse dignoscitur. Non est autem mirum si maior est be any doubt at all about the gospel, but because the
auctoritas totius quam partis. Et ideo maior est auctoritas whole is greater than any of its parts---therefore the
totius congregationis comprehendentis evangelistas et church which is of greater authority than an evangelist is
omnes alios orthodoxos usque ad hec tempora quam the church of which the author of the gospel is known to
unius vel etiam plurium personarum congregationis be part, and it is not astonishing if the authority of the
eiusdem.
whole is greater than that of a part. And therefore the
authority of the whole gathering, including the
evangelists and all other orthodox [believers] right up to
these times, is greater than that of one member, or even
of many members, of that gathering.
Quod autem conditor canonum non sit maioris That the maker of the canons is not of greater authority
auctoritatis quam evangelium sed multo minoris ipsimet than the gospel, however, but of much less, the makers
canonum conditores testantur aperte. Urbanus enim of the canons themselves clearly attest. For as we find in
papa, ut habetur 25, q. 1, c. Sunt quidam , ait: 25, q. 1, c. Sunt quidam [col.1008], Pope Urban says, "It
"Sciendum vero summopere est quia inde novas leges should indeed be especially known that he", i.e. the
potest condere", pontifex supple Romanus, "unde Roman pontiff, "can establish new laws on a point
evangeliste aliquid nequaquam dixerunt. Ubi vero aperte where the evangelists have not said anything. But where
Dominus, vel eius apostoli , et eos sequentes sancti the Lord or his apostles and the holy fathers who
patres aliquid sententialiter diffinierunt , ibi non novam followed them have judicially decided something, there
legem Romanus pontifex dare potest, sed potius quod the Roman pontiff can not give a new law, but rather
predicatum est usque ad animam et sanguinem should confirm what has been proclaimed at the cost of
confirmare debet. Si enim quod docuerunt apostoli et life and blood. For if he were to strive to destroy what
prophete destruere (quod absit) niteretur, non sententiam the apostles and prophets taught---may it never
dare sed magis errare convinceretur ." Ex hiis verbis happen---he would be convicted not of passing
colligitur evidenter quod conditor canonum multo judgment but rather of erring." We clearly gather from
minoris auctoritatis est quam evangelium sacrosanctum, these words that the maker of the canons is of much less
contra quod novam legem nequaquam condere potest, authority than the sacred gospel. He can not establish
sed ipsum defendere usque ad animam et sanguinem any new law against it, but is obliged to defend it even
obligatur; contra quod si novam legem dare presumeret at the cost of life and blood; if he were to presume to
esset de errore per catholicos convincendus.
give a new law against it, he should be convicted of
error by catholics.
His Fabianus papa concordat, qui ut habetur 11 q. 3, c. Pope Fabian agrees with this. As we find in 11, q. 3, c.
Qui omnipotentem ait, "Qui omnipotentem Deum metuit Qui omnipotentem [col. 669], he says, "He who fears
nec contra evangelium Christi nec contra apostolos nec God almighty does not agree in any way to do anything
prophetas vel sanctorum patrum instituta agere aliquid against the gospel of Christ, the apostles, the prophets or
ullo modo consentit". Ex quibus verbis patenter habetur the determinations of the holy fathers." We clearly find
quod conditor canonum si omnipotentem metuit nichil from these words that if the maker of the canons fears
contra evangelium presumit statuere, et ita non maioris the Almighty, he presumes to establish nothing which is
sed minoris auctoritatis quam evangelium esse against the gospel, and thus he is known not to be of
dinoscitur.
greater but of less authority than the gospel.
Quod ex plurimis capitulis in libro decretorum insertis This is even clearer and more certain from many
clarius luce constat, sicut ex dist. 9, c. Noli et c. Ego chapters inserted in the Decretum, as in dist. 9, c. Noli
solis et c. Quis nesciat et c. Noli et c. Neque, et ex dist. [c. 3, col.17], c. Ego solis [c. 5, col. 17], c. Quis nesciat
11 c. Consuetudinem, et ex dist. 14, c. Sicut, et ex causa [c. 8, col.17], c. Noli [c. 9, col.18] and c. Neque [c. 10,
11, q. 3, c. Si is qui preest. Alie auctoritates col.18], dist. 11, c. [Nos] consuetudinem [c. 8, col.25],
quamplurime quas longum esset recitare hoc idem dist. 14, c. Sicut [c. 2, col.33] [for which see Gratian,
asserunt manifeste, et propter easdem rationes dicunt The Treatise on Laws, translated by Augustine
quod tota multitudo Christianorum nunc vita mortali Thompson, with the Ordinary Gloss, translated by James
viventium non est maioris auctoritatis quam sit sanctum Gordley (Washington, 1993, pp. 29-32, 40, 53), and 11,
evangelium, quia multitudo viventium evangelium debet q. 3, c. Si is qui preest [col.671]. Very many other texts,
usque ad animam et sanguinem defensare.
which it would take long to record, plainly assert the
same thing, and for the same reasons say that the whole
multitude of Christians now living in this mortal life is
not of greater authority than the holy gospel, because the
multitude of those living ought to defend the gospel at
the cost of life and blood.
9

