maculati. Virtutum autem eminentia et rerum experientia principal opponents of a pope stained by heretical
opportune videntur utrisque, ut sicut oportet et quando wickedness. But pre-eminence as to virtues and
oportet papam hereticum et complices eius impugnent. practical experience seem convenient to both categories
of opponents in order that they may attack the heretic
pope and his accomplices as and when convenience
dictates.
Discipulus: Adhuc ista reponsio est magis generalis Student: Again, this response is more general than I
quam vellem. Unde precor ut secundum aliquam would like. Hence I pray that you follow some opinion
sententiam aliquas prerogativas speciales assignes, in listing certain special prerogatives which it is proper
quibus oportet principales impugnatores pape heretici for the opponents of a heretic pope to possess in the
preeminere ad hoc quod idonei censeantur.
highest degree in order to be considered fit to perform
their task.
Magister: Speciales prerogative tales sunt innumere.
Master: There are innumerable special prerogatives of
this kind.
Discipulus: Aliquas paucas tange.
Student: Mention a few of them.
Magister: Dicunt quidam quod ad hoc quod quis Master: There are those who say that in order that
impugnator pape heretici idoneus censeatur, requiritur someone may be considered a fit opponent of a heretic
quod sit firmiter stabilitus in veritatibus contrariis pope, it is expected that he be firmly grounded in the
erroribus pape heretici, ut scilicet nulla ratione ab illis truths which contradict the errors professed by the
veritatibus possit avelli. Unde quantum ad veritates illas heretic pope, namely, that no reason would sway him
assertiones suas neque correctioni pape, neque from these truths. Hence, he must not submit his stated
correctioni concilii generalis, neque correctioni convictions as to these truths to the correction of the
angelorum de celo debet submittere, sed quemadmodum pope, nor to the correction of a general council, nor to
beatus Paulus scripsit Galatis dicens: "licet nos aut the correction of angels from heaven. But just as blessed
angelus de celo evangeliset vobis preter quam quod Paul wrote to the Galatians, saying: "though an angel
evangelizavimus vobis, anathema sit", ita quilibet from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that
impugnator idoneus pape heretici dicat in corde suo et which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed",
proferat ore cum fuerit opportunum: "licet ego, aut papa, [Galatians 1:8] so ought every qualified opponent of a
aut concilium generale, aut tota congregatio heretic pope say in his heart and utter verbally at the
christianorum, aut tota multitudo angelorum de celo opportune moment: "were I myself, or the pope, or the
errores pape heretici evangelizare, asserere vel affirmare general council, or the entire congregation of Christians,
presumpserit, anathema sit". Ideo autem non debet or the whole multitude of angels in heaven, to presume
impugnator idoneus pape heretici assertiones suas to preach, assert, or affirm the errors of a heretic pope,
quantum ad veritates contrarias erroribus pape heretici let each and every one be accursed". And that is why the
alicuius correctioni submittere, quia illas veritates non qualified opponent of a heretic pope must not submit to
tanquam ab homine, sed tanquam a Deo, qui correctione someone's correction his assertions with respect to
non eget, traditas suscepit, amplectitur, et veneratur. Et truths which contradict the errors of the heretic pope,
ex isto, ut dicunt, eliditur error quorundam dicentium because he has received, he holds, and he venerates
quod omnis christianus fidem suam debet supponere these truths as given to him not by man, but by God, and
correctioni beatissimi pape. Quod probant per exemplum God does not require correction. This point, they go on
de beato Hieronymo, qui fidem suam quam didicerat in to say, eliminates the error of some interpreters who
ecclesia, et in qua nutritus fuit, supposuit correctioni et claim that every Christian must submit his faith to the
iudicio beatissimi pape. Sed hoc, dicunt isti, esse correction of the most holy pope. They prove this claim
erroneum, imo hereticum manifeste, quod exemplis et by the example of blessed Jerome, who submitted his
ratione probare conantur. Primo quidem exemplo beati faith, which he had learned in the church, and in which
Pauli, qui, ut legitur ad Galatos 2, cum reprehenderet he was educated, to the correction and judgement of the
papam, scilicet beatum Petrum, assertionem suam most holy pope. But the thinkers we are reporting say
correctioni pape nequaquam submisit, imo voluit quod that this claim is erroneous, and even obviously
papa se correctioni sue committeret. Ideo enim heretical, a judgement they attempt to prove by
reprehendit papam, ut de excessu commisso in examples and by reason. And first by the example of
preiudicium evangelice veritatis corrigeret. Secundo, blessed Paul, who, as we read in Galatians 2, when he
probant hoc exemplo clericorum romanorum qui se a rebuked the pope (namely blessed Peter), in no sense
communione Anastasii pape 2i laudabiliter abegerunt, de submitted his assertion to the correction of the pope, but
quibus constat quod assertionem suam correctioni pape rather wanted the pope to submit to his own (Paul's)
nullatenus submiserunt.
correction. [Galatians 2:11] Indeed he rebuked the pope
so that the pope could correct himself as to a deviation
committed in prejudice of evangelical truth. Secondly,
they prove this judgement by the example of the Roman
clerks who removed themselves in praiseworthy manner
483

