council lest his assertion be examined, he should be
considered pertinacious and heretical.
CAPITULUM 30.

Chapter 30.

Discipulus Si aliter potest errans de pertinacia convinci Student Do not hesitate to explain if someone erring
non differas declarare.
can be convicted of pertinacity in another way.

Magister Decimotertio potest quis convinci pertinax, ut
nonnulli dicunt, si de veritate damnabiliter renuit
informari. Ad cuius evidentiam distinguunt dicentes
quod aut errantis assertio tanquam haereticalis
reprehenditur a peritis et de cuius dogmatisatione
scandalum est ortum aut nequaquam reprehenditur a
peritis nec de eius dogmatisatione scandalizantur
fideles.

Master Some people say that someone can be
convicted as pertinacious in a thirteenth way if he
culpably refuses to be instructed about the truth. They
make a distinction to explain this, saying that the
assertion of someone erring either is censured by the
learned as heretical and that a scandal has arisen from
its being taught as doctrine, or is not censured by the
learned and the faithful are not scandalised by its being
taught as doctrine.

In secundo casu quamvis interdum de veritate renuens
informari apud Deum pertinax et haereticus habeatur,
tamen in foro ecclesiae non videtur quod sit haereticus
iudicandus, licet postea tanquam haeresis eadem
assertio damnaretur.

Although in the second case the person refusing to be
instructed about the truth may sometimes be held by
God to be pertinacious and heretical, yet it does not
seem that he should be judged to be heretical in the
forum of the church, even if that same assertion were
later condemned as heretical.

In primo casu dicunt quod renuens de veritate informari
etiam in foro ecclesiae est pertinax et haereticus
reputandus. Quod multis rationibus probare nituntur.
Quarum prima est haec. Contra fidem errans qui non est
paratus corrigi nec quaerit cauta sollicitudine veritatem
est pertinax et haereticus iudicandus (24. q. 3. c. Dixit
apostolus). Qui autem de veritate renuit informari si
eius error reprehenditur a peritis non est paratus corrigi
nec quaerit cauta sollicitudine veritatem; ergo pertinax
et haereticus est censendus.

In the first case they say that someone refusing to be
instructed about the truth should be regarded as
pertinacious and heretical even in the forum of the
church. They try to prove this with many arguments.
The first of them is this. Someone who errs against the
faith and is not ready to be corrected and does not seek
the truth with cautious responsibility should be judged
to be pertinacious and heretical (24, q. 3, c. [28] Dixit
apostolus [cols. 1428-9]); he who refuses to be
instructed about the truth if his error is censured by the
learned, however, is not ready to be corrected and is
not seeking the truth with cautious responsibility; he
should be considered, therefore, pertinacious and
heretical.

Discipulus Ista ratio videtur concludere etiam de illo
qui de veritate renuit informari cuius opinio non
reprehenditur a peritis et de qua opinione nullum
scandalum est exortum, quia talis non quaerit cauta
sollicitudine veritatem.

Student That argument seems to be conclusive also of
someone refusing to be instructed about the truth
whose opinion is not censured by the learned and about
whose opinion no scandal has arisen, because that
person is not seeking the truth with cautious
responsibility.

(Fr reads: Discipulus Ista ratio tam bene concluderet, ut
videtur, de secundo casu sicut de primo. Omnis taliter
errans ut dictum est in casu peccat contra fidem et apud
Deum censetur haeretcius; nec apparte unde paratus est
corrigi.)

(Fr reads: Student That argument would be as strongly
conclusive, it seems, about the second case as about the
first. Everyone erring in the way set out in the example
sins against the faith and is considered a heretic by
God; and it does not appear from this by whom he is

156

