something similar which is opposed to orthodox faith.
Capitulum 19
Chapter 19
Discipulus: Modum ponendi illorum aliqualiter incipio Student: The position of these theorists is starting to
advertere. Ut tamen eum magis intelligam primo become somewhat clearer to me. Nevertheless, so that I
probare coneris quod a papa heretico in aliquo casu may understand it even better, do try to prove initially
liceat appellare, et postea plura de eadem materia that it is permitted in some case to appeal from a heretic
interrogabo.
pope. Afterwards I will ask more questions about this
topic.
Magister: Quia manifestiora, si aliqui de eis Master: Since those matters which are more obvious
dubitaverint, sunt primo probanda ut per ipsa ad (were some to profess doubt about them) must be
ignotorum perveniatur notitiam, ideo primo supposito demonstrated at the outset so that through them one may
casu apertissimo ostenditur quod a papa heretico liceat achieve elucidation of matters yet unknown, let me first
appellare.
show that it is permitted to appeal from a heretic pope by
supposing a completely straightforward case.
Discipulus: Pone casum, tamen possibilem.
Student: Lay out the case but do not exceed the bounds
of the possible.
Magister: Ponatur quod aliquis accuset alium coram Master: Let us assume that someone accuses another
papa quod est hereticus eo quod tenet et asserit fidem before the pope of being a heretic because the accused
christianam esse falsam et legem sarracenorum esse supposedly holds and asserts that the Christian faith is
tenendam, et Christum falsum fuisse prophetam et esse false, that the law of the Saracens should be embraced,
dampnatum. Quo accusato et lite contestata, papa and that Christ was a prophet both false and discredited.
proferat diffinitivam sententiam quod accusatus non est After the accusation and the ensuing judicial process, the
hereticus quia omnia predicta que dicit et asserit pope renders a definitive judgement to the effect that the
continent veritatem.
person accused is not a heretic because all of the
aforementioned theses stated and asserted by him are
true.
Discipulus: Quamvis iste casus nunquam contigerit et Student: Although this is a case that never happened
forte nunquam eveniet tamen durum michi videtur and perhaps never will, I find it difficult to assert that it
asserere quod sit impossibilis. Nam apparet quod neque smacks of impossibility. For it seems that one cannot
ex scriptura divina neque ex doctrina ecclesie potest clearly demonstrate either by Holy Writ or by the
ostendi aperte quod nullus papa futurus erit doctrine of the church that no future pope will be the
Antichristus. Cum etiam de tribu Dan, de qua nonnulli Antichrist. It is indeed probable that many Christians
Antichristum estimant nasciturum, multi forte christiani through their ancestors who were converted to the faith
mediantibus conversis ad fidem traxerint iam dudum have long established roots to the tribe of Dan, from
originem, de quibus posset procreari Antichristus. Et which some believe that the Antichrist will be born [For
adhuc possit forte de illa tribu aliquis fidem christianam a discussion of this tradition see David Burr, Olivi's
suscipere de quo posset nasci filius qui primo valeret Peaceable Kingdom, Philadelphia 1993, p. 150]. And
eligi in summum pontificem et postea posset se patenter even in our time it is quite possible for someone from
ostendere Antichristum. Et ita nescitur an aliquis that tribe to accept the Christian faith, to have a son born
christianus futurus papa de tribu Dan tracturus originem to him, that son being subsequently elected pope, and
erit Antichristus. Constat autem quod Antichristus afterwards clearly showing himself to be the Antichrist.
manifeste docebit quod lex christianorum est falsa et And thus it cannot be known whether some Christian
quod Christus fuit falsus propheta. Casus autem and future pope, with roots in the tribe of Dan, will be
predictus non videtur impossibilis quia nescitur quod the Antichrist. It is, however, established that the
nullus papa futurus sectam sarracenorum accipiet. Antichrist will unambiguously teach that the law of the
Posset enim accidere quod papa etiam qui primo fuisset Christians is false and that Christ was a false prophet.
catholicus inciperet reputare sectam sarracenorum esse And the described case does not appear impossible
meliorem lege christianorum, qui tantam posset primo because it is not known that no future pope will submit
contrahere amicitiam occultam cum sarracenis quod to the sect of the Saracens. For it may come to pass that
eorum potentia ad se vocata auderet patenter asserere even a pope who was at first catholic would begin to
legem christianam esse falsam et iniquam et ad legem consider that the sect of the Saracens was better than the
sarracenorum sumendam cogere christianos. Cum enim law of the Christians. This pope could initially develop
constet multos christianos etiam clericos et religiosos ad such a strong secret friendship with the Saracens, that
sectam sarracenorum fuisse conversos non videtur quin having summoned their military might to his side he
etiam papa posset ad tantam insaniam devenire, cum would dare to openly assert that the Christian law was
enim papa non sit confirmatus in fide sicut nec ceteri false and unjust, and force Christians to accept the law of
idem quantum ad possibilitatem convertendi se ad the Saracens. Since it is indeed an established fact that
sarracenos de ipso et de aliis videtur esse tenendum. many Christians (including clerks and religious) have
Posito ergo casu predicto pro assertione prefata satagas been converted to the sect of the Saracens, it does not
302

