et ita aliqua persona esset superior papa quod non est someone could compel him to assemble the general
verum ut dicunt. Ecclesia ergo universalis de papa council that someone would be superior to the pope, and
iudicare non potest, et ita papa quantumcunque fuerit de thus a particular person would be superior to the pope,
heresi diffamatus ecclesie minime est subiectus.
which is not true, they say. Therefore the universal
church cannot pass judgment concerning the pope, and
thus the pope no matter how much he would have been
defamed of heresy is in no way subject to the church.
Predicta assertio etiam auctoritatibus et exemplis It appears that the aforementioned assertion may also be
videtur posse probari. Plures vero auctoritates hoc demonstrated by authorities and examples. Indeed many
expresse sonantes supra primo c. huius sexti sunt authorities proclaiming exactly this are provided above
inducte. Hoc etiam alia auctoritate simul et exemplo in the first chapter of this sixth book. This is also proved
probatur. Nam prout recitatum est supra ubi inquisitum by another authority together with an example. For as
est an papa possit hereticari, Nicholaus papa ut legitur was recited earlier, where we inquired whether the pope
di. 21 c. Nunc autem ait: "tempore Diocletiani et can lapse into heresy [1 Dial. 5.2], Pope Nicholas states
Maximiani augustorum Marcellinus episcopus urbis (we read it in di. 21 c. Nunc autem)[col. 71]: "In the time
Rome qui postea insignis martyr effectus est, adeo of the senior emperors Diocletian and Maximinus, the
compulsus est a paganis ut templum eorum ingressus bishop of the city of Rome, Marcellinus, who later
grana thuris super prunes imponeret, cuius rei gratia became a glorious martyr, was coerced by the pagans to
collecto numerosorum episcoporum concilio et such an extent that he entered their temple and placed
inquisitione facta, hoc idem pontifex se egisse confessus grains of incense upon live coals. A council of numerous
est. Nullus tamen eorum proferre sententiam in eum bishops was convened on account of this and an inquiry
ausus est dum ei sepissime omnes dicerent 'tuo ore was held, whereupon the same Pontiff admitted he had
iudica causam tuam non nostro iudicio' et iterum 'noli done the deed. While none of them dared to pass
audiri in nostro iudicio sed collige in sinu tuo causam sentence upon him, still they all would say to him
tuam' et rursum 'quoniam ex te' inquiunt 'iustificaberis repeatedly 'judge your case from your own mouth, not in
aut ex ore tuo condempnaberis' et iterum dicunt 'prima terms of our judgment' and once more 'do not proceed
sedes non iudicabitur a quoquam'". Ex quibus verbis with a hearing in our court but reserve judgment of your
datur intelligi quod beatus Marcellinus fuit de heresi own case' and again 'in that way (they state) you will be
diffamatus, nec mirum cum actum hereticalem justified by yourself or condemned from your own
commiserit. Ex quo enim idolis immolavit fuit de mouth' and once again they say 'the first see will not be
apostasia perfidie vehementer suspectus, quare potuit de judged by anyone'". We are given to understand from
heresi graviter diffamari. Hoc tamen non obstante nemo these words that blessed Marcellinus was defamed of
episcoporum fuit ausus in ipsum proferre sententiam. heresy, nor was this surprising since he had committed
Ergo quantumcunque papa fuerit de heresi diffamatus an heretical act. For having sacrificed to idols he was
nullius est subiectus iudicio.
strongly suspected of the perfidy of apostasy and
therefore could be gravely defamed of heresy. Yet in
spite of this none of the bishops dared to pass sentence
upon him. Therefore no matter how much the pope has
been defamed of heresy he is subject to the judgment of
no one.
Discipulus: Ista ratio non videtur concludere quod papa Student: This argument does not appear to conclude
de heresi diffamatus non sit subiectus ecclesie universali that a pope defamed of heresy is not subject to the
et concilio generali, quia auctoritas Nicholai non universal church and the general council, because the
loquitur de ecclesia universali et concilio generali, sed authority of Pope Nicholas does not speak of the
de quibusdam episcopis qui convenerunt ad universal church and the general council but of certain
inquirendum de causa pape Marcellini.
bishops who came together to inquire about the cause of
Pope Marcellinus.
Magister: Dicunt alii quod auctoritas predicta Nicholai Master: Others say that the aforementioned authority of
manifeste declarat quod papa de heresi diffamatus etiam Pope Nicholas obviously declares that a pope defamed
ecclesie universali et concilio generali minime est of heresy is in no way subject even to the universal
subiectus,
quia
secundum
beatum
Hilarium church and the general council, because according to
"intelligentia dictorum ex causis est assumenda blessed Hilary "the meaning of statements is to be
dicendi". Ad intelligendum ergo verba predicta que derived from the reasons for uttering them."[Hilary of
Nicholaus papa recitat recurrendum est ad causam Poitiers, De Trinitate ,Bk. iv, ch. 14: PL 10, col. 107]
dicendi. Causam autem quare episcopi qui convenerant Therefore in order to understand the aforementioned
ad inquirendum de facto pape dixerunt "tuo ore iudica words which Pope Nicholas recites reference must be
causam tuam non nostro iudicio" ipsimet assignant made to the reason for uttering them. But the reason why
dicentes "prima sedes non iudicabitur a quoquam". In the bishops, who had come together to inquire into the
verbis istis insinuant aperte quod summus pontifex matter of the pope, said "judge your case from your own
286

