made the aforementioned declaration. For someone may
unknowingly utter as an opinion a heresy which is
explicitly condemned, without mortal sin and
collaboration in heretical wicked ness, so long as
pertinacity is in no way conjoined to his opinion.
Quarta conclusio est quod predicatores et doctores qui The fourth conclusion is that preachers and doctors sin
impugnantes papam hereticum pro assertione heretica mortally, and are not innocent of collaboration in
dampnata explicite quam possunt faciliter scire esse heretical wickedness, who attack or condemn thinkers
dampnatam explicite et propter quam sciunt papam de opposing a heretic pope because of an explicitly
heresi impugnari, reprobant aut impugnant, peccant condemned heretical assertion, which the preachers and
mortaliter nec a fautoria pravitatis heretice sunt doctors may easily learn to be explicitly condemned and
immunes. Quia tantum zelum debent habere de fide on account of which they know the pope is being
catholica quam honori et favori cuiuslibet mortalis attacked for heresy. For they should have such zeal for
preferre tenentur, quod cum nuntiatur eis papam in the catholic faith, which they are bound to rank above the
certo articulo contra fidem catholicam errare, si de honour and favour of any mortal, that when they receive
eadem assertione se intromittere approbando vel news that the pope has erred against the catholic faith on
reprobando proponunt, non debent negligere querere a certain issue, if they intend to become involved in the
diligenter an assertio pape sit condempnata, et ita si issue of his assertion either in a supportive or in a critical
possunt faciliter scire assertionem eandem esse role, they must not neglect to scrupulously inquire
dampnatam explicite seu contrariam veritatem esse whether the pope's assertion has been condemned. And
explicite approbatam, nullatenus a peccato mortali et a thus, if they can easily learn that his assertion is
fautoria heretice pravitatis excusarentur si impugnantes explicitly condemned or the contrary truth explicitly
assertionem pape erroneam improbare presumunt.
approved, in no way would they be excused from mortal
sin and collaboration in heretical wickedness if they
presume to attack those who oppose the erroneous
assertion of the pope.
Quinta conclusio est quod predicatores et doctores The fifth conclusion is that preachers and doctors who
impugnatores doctrine erronee pape heretici because of the latter's opposition persecute opponents of
dampnatam explicite, sive sciant sive ignorent eam esse a heretic pope's false and explicitly condemned doctrine
dampnatam
explicite,
propter
impugnationem by disparaging them or by inflicting wickednesses or
huiusmodi persequuntur, eis detrahendo
vel indignities upon them, or by provoking others against
contumelias aut in perpera irrogando, vel contra eos them, or by distressing them in whatever fashion, directly
alios provocando seu per se aut per alios molestiam or through others, sin mortally and are to be considered
quomodolibet inferendo, peccant mortaliter et sunt collaborators in heretical wickedness, whether they know
fautores heretice pravitatis reputandi. Gravius tamen or not that the pope's erroneous doctrine is explicitly
peccant illi qui sciunt doctrinam pape esse erroneam condemned. And those who know that the doctrine of the
quam illi qui ignorant.
pope is erroneous sin more grievously than those who do
not know this.
Discipulus: Quare non possunt ignorantes per Student: Why may the ignorant not be excused by their
ignorantiam excusari.
ignorance.
Magister: Respondetur quod ignorantia iuris quod quis Master: The answer is that ignorance of a law which one
scire tenetur non excusat. Hoc autem quilibet scire is obligated to know is no excuse. And everyone is
tenetur quod impugnantes aliquam doctrinam tanquam bound to know this: that those who are in opposition to a
erroneam non sunt aliqualiter molestandi nisi given doctrine because it is presumed by them to be
certitudinaliter constet eos falso vel inique impugnare erroneous must in no way be distressed unless it is quite
doctrinam eandem. Quare cum, si doctrina pape sit certain that they are opposing this doctrine in error or
erronea, non possit constare quod impugnatores ipsius without regard for equity. Therefore, since it is not
propter solam impugnationem eam falso impugnant vel possible to be certain, given that the pope's doctrine is
inique (quia huiusmodi impugnatio est licita), non sunt false, that those who oppose it are by that fact alone
propter
impugnationem
huiusmodi
aliqualiter attacking it wrongly or immorally (because their
molestandi.
opposition is lawful), they are not to be in any way
distressed on account of such opposition.
Capitulum 50
Chapter 50
Discipulus: Puto quod ad probandum omnes Student: I believe that if you were to reflect, you would
conclusiones predictas rationes et auctoritates be able to produce very many arguments and authorities
quamplures, si cogitares, scires adducere, quas omnes proving all the aforementioned conclusions. But omit all
causa brevitatis omitte, et dic breviter quid sentiendum of them for the sake of brevity, and state concisely what
esset de doctoribus et magistris qui doctrinam pape ought to be our feelings concerning doctors and masters
manifeste
erroneam
defensare
aut
excusare who would strive to defend or to excuse in any way a
451

