nostrorum. Propitius sit nobis Deus. Non est nobis utile Antiochus" (that is to say the heretic pope) "so that
relinquere legem et iustitias Dei. Non audibimus verba everyone would abandon the tradition of their fathers and
regis Antiochi" (id est pape heretici) "nec consent to the orders of the king, I, and my sons, and my
sacrificabimus transgredientes legis nostre mandata ut brothers, will continue to obey the law of our fathers.
eamus altera via".
May God be favourable to us. We do not deem it useful
for us to abandon the law and the justices of God. We
will not listen to the words of king Antiochus" (i.e. of the
heretic pope) "we will not offer sacrifice, and will not
break the commands of our law so as to adopt another
path"[1 Maccabees 2:19-22].
Discipulus: Videtur quod si pauci resisterent toti Student: It appears that if a few were to resist to the
residue multitudini christianorum laborarent in vanum. whole remaining multitude of Christians, they would be
Ergo hoc attemptare nullo modo deberent.
labouring in vain. Therefore they should in no way
attempt to do this.
Magister: Respondetur quod pauci non deberent de Master: The answer is that these few ought not to
victoria desperare. Imo unus solus de victoria sperare despair of gaining victory. Indeed even a single
deberet, quia ut habetur 1 Mac. 3: "non est differentia individual must hope to be victorious, because (we have
in conspectus Dei celi liberare in multis et in paucis, this in 1 Maccabees 3): "there is no difference in the
quia non in multitudine exercitus victoria belli sed de perspective of the God of heaven to effect liberation
celo fortitudo est". Et 1 Reg. 14 sic habetur: "non est through many or through few, since victory in war does
Domino difficile salvare vel in multitudine vel in not depend on the army's numbers, and strength comes
paucis". Et 2 Para. 14 sic habetur: "Domine non est from heaven"[1 Maccabees 3:18-19]. And in 1 Kings 14
apud te ulla distantia utrum in paucis auxilieris an in we have this: "for there is no restraint to the Lord to save
pluribus". Ex quibus patet quod si pauci contra papam by many or by few" [1 Samuel 14:6]. And in 2
hereticum bellum susciperent, tota alia multitudine sibi Chronicles 14 we have this: "Lord it is nothing with Thee
perperam adherente, de victoria desperare non debent, to help, whether with many or with them that have no
quia bellum tale non est bellum eorum sed bellum power"[2 Chronicles 14:11]. It is evident from this that if
Domini, qui est Veritas que super omnes vincit in a few wage war against a heretic pope while the whole
veritate. Ergo habentes fiduciam, pro eadem certent remaining multitude wrongly supports him, they ought
usque ad mortem, et Deus expugnabit pro eis inimicos not to despair of victory, for such a war is not their war
eorum.
but the war of the Lord, and He is Truth whose truth
defeats all. Therefore let them confidently struggle for
truth unto death [Ecclesiasticus 4:33], and God will
destroy their enemies for them.
Capitulum 48
Chapter 48
Discipulus: Auctoritates prescripte michi clare Student: The authorities just outlined clearly
demonstrant quod unus solus catholicus posset secure demonstrate to me that a single Catholic is capable of
bellum contra papam hereticum cum tota sua cohorte confidently waging war against a heretic pope and all his
suscipere, nec deberet de victoria aliqualiter desperare. minions, nor should he in any way despair of victory. But
Dubito autem ut, si unquam aliquis papa futurus est if some future pope ever becomes a heretic I am
hereticus pro multitudine christianorum poterit dici uncertain whether the following statement of our Saviour
illud Salvatoris: "filius hominis veniens putas inveniet might be uttered about the multitude of Christians:
fidem in terra", quia reor quod paucissimi sibi resistent. "nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find
Puto enim quod tunc adimplebitur prophetia beati Pauli faith on the earth?"[Luke 18:8], because I fear that very
dicentis 2 ad Tim. 4: "erit enim tempus cum sanam few Christians will resist the heretic pope. Indeed I think
doctrinam non sustinebunt sed ad sua desideria that at that time will be fulfilled the prophecy of blessed
coacervabunt sibi magistros prurientes auribus et a Paul who states in 2 Timothy 4: "for the time will come
veritate quidem auditum avertent, ad fabulas autem when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their
convertentur". Quia fabulas et errores pape heretici own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having
multitudo precipue magistrorum ambitiosorum et itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the
avarorum sequetur. Idcirco peto ut ostendas secundum truth, and shall be turned unto fables"{2 Timothy 4:3-4].
aliquorum sententiam quid paucis in sacra pagina Because it is particularly the host of ambitious and
eruditis (sive fuerint magistri sive discipuli) esset greedy masters which will follow the fables and errors of
agendum si papa efficeretur hereticus, et quid omnes a heretic pope. I pray therefore that you will reveal by
predicatores et doctores haberent agere si omnes reference to the opinion of some, what ought to be done
veritati fidei adhererent.
by those few learned persons (whether they be masters or
students) should the pope become a heretic, and what
would all preachers and doctors have to do if they all
supported the truth of faith.
443

