Parvuli enim habent habitum fidei. Ergo errante tota
multitudine Christianorum habencium usum racionis
possunt salvari promissiones Christi per parvulos
baptizatos. Ergo temerarium est asserere quod
numquam tota multitudo Christianorum usum racionis
habencium contra fidem errabit.

WILLIAM
OF
Part 1, Book 6, chapters 1-15
Text
and
translation
July 2000 (revised May 2004)
Copyright (c) 2000, 2004 The British Academy

the habit of faith. If the whole multitude of Christians
who have use of reason err, therefore, Christ's
promises can be kept through baptised infants.
Therefore it is rash to affirm that the whole multitude
of Christians who have use of reason will never err
against faith.

OCKHAM,
by

DIALOGUS
George

Knysh

Explicit liber quintus prime partis dialogorum, docens Here ends the fifth book of the first part of the dialogues,
quis potest heretica labe maculari. Incipit liber sextus teaching who may be defiled by heretical stain. The
partis eiusdem, de punitione hereticorum et specialiter sixth book of the same part begins, investigating the
pape effecti heretici investigans.
punishment of heretics and especially of the Pope who
has become a heretic
De punitione hereticorum et specialiter pape effecti On the punishment of heretics and especially of the Pope
heretici
who has become a heretic
Capitulum 1
Chapter 1
Discipulus: Solutiones predictarum rationum per Student: I shall endeavour to discover the solutions of
memetipsum satagam invenire et ideo qui possunt the preceding arguments by myself and therefore I shall
hereticari te interrogare desistam, nonnulla de puniendis cease to question you about potential heretics. I now
hereticis amodo quesiturus. Porro quia istud opus volui duly intend to raise questions concerning the punishment
fieri
principaliter propter dissensionem
inter to be inflicted on heretics. Moreover, since I wanted this
sanctissimum patrem et dominum, dominum Ioh. papam work to be composed principally on account of the
22-um et quosdam qui ipsum de heretica pravitate discord between the Most Holy Father and Lord, the
diffamant, cum quibus in hoc convenio quod papa Lord Pope John XXII, and certain persons who are
potest heretica labe respergi licet predictum dominum spreading rumours of his heretical wickedness (I agree
virum catholicum reputem et fidelem, ideo principaliter with them that a pope may be spattered with heretical
in hoc libro sexto qualiter et a quo sit papa si efficiatur stain but consider the aforementioned Lord to be a
hereticus feriendus investigare curabo. Verumptamen faithful and catholic man), I shall consequently in this
quia papa valet de heresi tam mendaciter quam veraciter sixth book undertake above all to investigate in what
infamari, primo inquiram de papa super crimine heresis manner and by whom a pope is to be struck down should
mendaciter diffamato, secundo de papa vere heretica he become a heretic. However, since a pope may be
labe fedato. In primis autem cupio scire an papa habeat defamed of heresy both falsely and truthfully, I shall
iudicem superiorem in terris, unde de hac re unam vel initially inquire about a pope mendaciously slandered of
plures assertiones cum suis motivis velis michi referre. the crime of heresy, and secondly of a pope truly
polluted by heretical stain. But first of all I would like to
know whether the pope has a superior judge on earth.
Would you then report to me one or more positions on
this issue along with their supporting argumentations.
Magister: Circa interrogationem tuam discrepant Master: The learned disagree about your question.
literati, quibusdam dicentibus quod papa non habet Some say that the pope has no superior on earth. Others
superiorem in terris, aliis dicentibus quod licet nulla contend that while no specific person is the pope's
persona in terris sit superior papa universalis tamen superior on earth, the universal church and also the
ecclesia et etiam concilium generale est supra papam. general council are nevertheless above the pope. Now of
Asserentium autem papam non habere superiorem in those who claim that the pope has no superior on earth,
terris quidam dicunt quod qui semel est canonice ad some say that once a man has been canonically elevated
papatum assumptus nisi renuntiaverit spontanea to the papal office he may never (save by divine power)
voluntate papatui nunquam poterit nisi per divinam be justly deprived of the papacy, even if he becomes a
potentiam papatu iuste privari etiam si efficiatur heretic, unless he resigns of his own free will. Others say
hereticus. Alii dicunt quod quamvis papa non habeat that although a pope has no superior on earth so long as
superiorem in terris quamdiu est papa si tamen efficiatur he remains pope, should he happen to become a heretic
267

