quemadmodum iudex secularis, licet nesciat aliquem after he has become a heretic. Similarly, although a
convincere esse hereticum, postquam tamen fuerit sibi secular judge does not know how to convict someone as
tanquam hereticus ab ecclesia derelictus, non ignorat a heretic, yet after someone has been abandoned to him
qua pena secundum iura civilia sit plectendus . Iudex by the Church as a heretic, he is not ignorant of the
igitur ecclesiasticus, si aliquis coram eo fuerit tanquam punishment that should be inflicted on him according to
hereticus accusatus, habet primo consulere theologos civil law. Therefore, if someone has been accused as a
quomodo oportet talem convincere et postmodum per heretic before an ecclesiastical judge, the latter first has
canones debet eum condigne pene subiicere.
to consult theologians about how he must convict such a
person and then ought to subject him through the canons
to a worthy punishment.
Quod autem theologi principaliter inter hereticos et Moreover, they show that theologians chiefly
orthodoxos discernant isti ostendunt, dicentes quod distinguish between heretics and the orthodox, saying
nullus est habendus hereticus nisi quia heresi pertinaci that no one should be considered a heretic unless he
animositate adheret. Sed ad theologos non solum que adheres to a heresy with pertinacious vehemence. But it
assertio est inter hereses numeranda, sed etiam que chiefly pertains to theologians to determine not only
adhesio debet pertinax estimari principaliter spectat what assertion should be numbered among the heresies
discernere. Ergo etc.
but also what adherence should be considered
pertinacious. Therefore, etc.
Capitulum 12
Chapter 12
Discipulus: LICET MIHI videatur probabile quod ad Student: ALTHOUGH it seems probable to me that it
theologos pertinet principaliter iudicare que assertio pertains chiefly to theologians to judge what assertion
catholica, que heretica, est censenda, adhuc tamen should be considered catholic and what heretical, yet I
ignoro an ad ipsos principaliter spectet quis pertinaciter, still do not know whether it chiefly pertains to them to
quis non pertinaciter , adheret pravitati heretice diffinire. decide who clings pertinaciously to heretical wickedness
Et ideo nescio an ad eos principaliter pertineat inter and who not pertinaciously. And therefore I do not
hereticos et orthodoxos distinguere, quia error absque know whether it chiefly pertains to them to distinguish
pertinacia errantem non reddit hereticum. De hoc igitur between heretics and the orthodox, because an error
velis disserere.
[held] without pertinacity does not render the errant a
heretic. So would you like to discuss this?
Magister:: De hoc quidam canoniste a theologis Master: Some canonists seem to differ from theologians
discordare videntur, dicentes quod ad canonistas about this, saying that it pertains chiefly to canonists to
principaliter pertinet iudicare quis est pertinax judge who should be judged as pertinacious. In
iudicandus , ad quod ponendum rationibus infra scriptis maintaining this they seem able to be moved by the
videntur posse moveri, quarum prima talis est. Nullus arguments written below, the first of which is as
errans contra fidem catholicam est pertinax iudicandus follows. No one erring against catholic faith should be
nisi qui correctus a suo prelato suum defendit errorem. judged pertinacious unless he defends his error after
Ad quos ergo spectat considerare quomodo errantes being corrected by his prelate. To those, therefore, to
corripi debeant a prelatis, ad illos principaliter spectat whom it pertains to examine how errants should be
discernere quis est pertinax iudicandus. Sed canoniste corrected by their prelates it chiefly pertains to
principaliter tractant quomodo errantes corripi debeant a determine who should be judged pertinacious. But
prelatis , quia ipsorum est scire quando et quomodo canonists chiefly treat of how errants should be
debeant prelati contra errantes procedere, quod ad corrected by their prelates, because it is up to them to
theologos minime spectat. Canoniste enim , non know when and how prelates should proceed against
theologi,
de
accusationibus,
denunciationibus, those who err, something that does not pertain to
inquisitionibus heretice pravitatis et etiam de theologians. For it is canonists, not theologians, who
citationibus, interrogationibus et examinationibus know about accusations and denunciations of, and
hereticorum et aliis que spectant ad iudiciarium ordinem inquisitions into, heretical wickedness and also about
circa errantes servandum cognoscunt . Ergo ad citations, interrogations and examinations of heretics
canonistas pertinet principaliter scire quis est pertinax et and about the other matters that pertain to the order of
hereticus iudicandus.
legal proceedings to be observed concerning those who
err. Therefore it chiefly pertains to canonists to know
who should be judged pertinacious and heretical.
Secunda ratio est hec. Pertinacia est quedam The second argument is this. Pertinacity is a certain
contumacia, secundum quod Gregorius innuit, ut contumacy, according to what Gregory, as we find in
habetur dist. 15 c. Non licuit, et beatus Augustinus , ut dist. 15, c. Non licuit [wrong reference], and blessed
legitur 24, q. 3, c. Qui in ecclesia. De contumacia autem Augustine, as we read in 24, q. 3, c. Qui in ecclesia
principaliter tractant canoniste, cum contumacia [col.998] imply. It is canonists, however, who chiefly
attendatur vel respectu non venientis, vel respectu non treat of contumacy, since contumacy applies either in
restituentis , vel respectu non respondentis aut obscure respect of to not coming or not restoring or not replying
18

