observanda et custodienda decernimus." Ergo concilium
generale contra fidem errare non potest.

now after the authority of those four, we decree that
they are both to be observed and to be guarded."
Therefore, a general council can not err against faith.

Octava racio est hec. Illa congregacio contra fidem
errare non potest qua errante universalis erraret ecclesia.
Sed errante generali concilio universalis erraret ecclesia,
quia illo errante nullus inveniretur qui auderet vel
posset fidem defendere orthodoxam. Ergo generale
concilium contra fidem errare non potest.

An eighth argument is this. That congregation whose
erring causes the universal church to err can not err
against faith. But if a general council errs the
universal church would err, because with its erring no
one would be found who would dare or be able to
defend orthodox faith. Therefore, a general council
can not err against faith.

Capitulum 28

Chapter 28

Discipulus Quamvis indubitanter existimem concilium
generale contra fidem errare non posse, qualiter tamen
tenentes assercionem contrariam ad raciones inductas
pro veritate respondeant non differas propalare.

Student: Although my belief that a general council
can not err against faith is undoubted would you
nevertheless not put off making clear how those who
maintain the opposite assertion reply to the
arguments brought forward for its truth.

Replies to arguments that a General Council can not err
Magister Ad primam racionem respondetur quod hec
est falsa: illa congregacio cuius iudicio in causa fidei
Romanus pontifex est subiectus contra fidem errare non
potest, quia licet papa non sit subiectus alicuius
congregacionis iudicio que errat contra fidem, quia eo
ipso quod contra fidem pertinaciter erraret nullus
catholicus in causa fidei eius esset subiectus iudicio,
papa tamen alicuius congregacionis recto iudicio non
falso parere tenetur que potest errare contra fidem licet
non erret, quemadmodum quilibet Christianus in causa
fidei subiectus est pape quando non errat contra fidem,
licet possit contra fidem errare. Sic eciam subditi
episcoporum, quantum ad ea que certa sunt fidei non
esse contraria orthodoxe, subsunt episcopis, qui tamen
episcopi, eciam quantum ad illa de quibus certum est
quod sunt hereses dampnate explicite, possunt contra
fidem errare.

Master: They reply to the first argument that it is
false [to say that] that congregation to the judgement
of which the Roman pontiff is subject in a matter of
faith can not err against faith, because although the
pope is not subject to the judgement of any
congregation which errs against faith -- since from
the very fact that it might err pertinaciously against
faith no catholic would be subject to its judgement in
a case of faith -- he is nevertheless bound to obey the
correct judgement, not a false one, of any
congregation which can err against faith but does not
err, just as every Christian is subject to the pope in a
case of faith when he does not err against faith,
though he can err against faith. In this way too, with
respect to those things that are certainly not opposed
to orthodox faith, the subjects of bishops are
subordinate to their bishops, although the bishops
themselves can err against faith even with respect to
those things which it is certain are explicitly
condemned heresies.

Cum vero accipitur quod papa non tenetur stare
mandatis alicuius congregacionis que potest contra
fidem errare, hoc negatur, licet non debeat parere
mandatis alicuius congregacionis que errat contra
fidem, sicut nec aliquis alius Christianus. Nec papa
potest recusare iudicium illius congregacionis que
potest errare contra fidem, licet possit recusare iudicium
illius que errat contra fidem.

Moreover when it is accepted that the pope is not
bound to abide by the commands of any congregation
that can err against faith, this is denied, although he
should not obey the commands of any congregation
which does err against faith, just as no other Christian
should. Nor can the pope reject the judgement of that
congregation which can err against faith, although he
can reject the judgement of that one which does err
against faith.

Discipulus Quid si de facto concilium generale erraverit
condemnando papam de heretica pravitate inique et
false?

Student: What if a general council did in fact err by
wrongly and falsely condemning the pope for
heretical wickedness?

243

