eruditissimi in scientia rationali morali et theologia Those who wrote the sacred canons were men very
fuerunt, nec per naturam absque predictis scientiis learned in rational science, moral science and theology
canones tam certe tamque profunde veritatis aliqualiter and they would not in any way have written canons of
conscripsissent. Cum ergo canoniste moderni scientias such sure and profound truth just naturally without the
ante dictas ignorent, quamvis valeant canonum sacrorum above-mentioned sciences. Since modern canonists are
retinere memoriam, ad intellectum tamen eorum ignorant of those sciences, therefore, even if they can
nequeunt pervenire.
retain the memory of the sacred canons, they are
nevertheless unable to arrive at the meaning of them.
Discipulus:: Nostri temporis canonistas non reputo Student: I do not regard the canonists of our time as
contemnendos, licet forte scire sacrorum canonum deserving contempt, though perhaps it does pertain more
intellectum, illorum precipue qui ex theologia vel to theologians than to canonists to know the meaning of
ratione naturali accipiuntur et non sunt pure positivi, the sacred canons, especially of those that are taken
magis ad theologos quam ad canonistas pertineat. Sed from theology or from natural reason and are not purely
circa hoc queso hic nullatenus immoreris, quia forte positive. But I ask you not to delay over this here,
postea de ista materia questionem habebo . Ad rationes because perhaps I will have a question about this matter
ergo prefatas accedas.
later. Would you therefore move on to the arguments
you mentioned?
Magister:: Quia in hoc opere non sensum meum sed Master: Because I have promised in this work not to
tuam voluntatem sequi promisi, rationes predictas follow my own inclination but your wish, I will begin to
incipiam pertractare. Unde ad primam nonnulli investigate those arguments. Thus some theologians
respondent theologi dicentes quod ad theologiam, non reply to the first by saying that it is to theology and not
ad scientiam canonistarum, principaliter spectat de to the science of the canonists that it chiefly pertains to
approbatione veritatum catholicarum et reprobatione treat of the approval of catholic truths and the
heresum dampnatarum tractare. Cuius rationem disapproval of condemned heresies. They argue for this
assignant, dicentes quod assertio veritatis est approbatio by saying that the assertion of a truth is the approval of
veritatis---qui enim aliquod dictum asserit esse verum it. For he who asserts that some statement is true
approbat idem dictum tanquam verum; assertio ergo approves of the statement as true. The assertion of a
veritatis est approbatio veritatis. Approbatio autem truth, therefore, is the approval of it---for anyone who
veritatis est reprobatio contrarie falsitatis, quia qui asserts that some statement is true approves that
aliquam approbat veritatem per consequens reprobat statement as true; the assertion of a truth, therefore, is
contrariam falsitatem, sicut qui precipit unum the approval of a truth. But the approval of a truth is the
contrariorum per consequens prohibet aliud, ut notat disapproval of the opposing falsity, because he who
glossa in decretis para. primo. Assertio igitur veritatum approves some truth does, as a consequence, disapprove
catholicarum per quandam consequentiam est reprobatio of the opposing falsity (just as he who commands one of
omnium heresum contrariarum. Cum ergo per [a pair of] contraries, as a consequence prohibits the
theologiam principaliter veritates catholice asserantur, other, as the gloss on para.1 [dist. 1, col.1] of the
sequitur quod approbatio veritatum catholicarum et Decretum notes). By implication, therefore, the assertion
dampnatio heresum principaliter ad theologiam pertineat of catholic truths is the disapproval of all opposing
.
heresies. Since catholic truths are chiefly asserted by
theology, it follows therefore that the approval of
catholic truths and the condemnation of heresies should
pertain principally to theology.
Discipulus:: Ista responsio videtur michi probabilis . Student: That reply seems probable to me. I would like
Vellem tamen scire quare dicunt isti quod talis to know, nevertheless, why they say that approval and
approbatio et dampnatio "principaliter " pertinent ad condemnation of this kind pertain "chiefly" to theology,
theologiam, ex quo insinuare videntur quod non tantum by which they seem to imply that they may not pertain
ad eam pertineant .
only to it.
Magister:: Ad istam tuam questionem respondent isti Master: They reply to that question of yours by saying
dicentes quod ad scientiam canonistarum pertinent libri that the books of the Decretum and Decretals, and other
decretorum et decretalium ac alie constitutiones et statutes and letters of the highest pontiffs (even if they
epistole summorum pontificum licet in predictis libris have not been inserted in the above books), pertain to
minime sint inserte . In predictis autem libris et in the science of the canonists. However, in those books
nonnullis constitutionibus et epistolis summorum and in some statutes and letters of the highest pontiffs
pontificum quedam veritates catholice asseruntur et some catholic truths are asserted and some heresies
nonnulle hereses reprobantur, licet tam ille veritates disapproved of, although both the truths and the heresies
quam hereses sint pauce respectu illarum que in are few in comparison with those that are found in
theologia habentur. Et ideo non tantum ad theologiam theology. And therefore it pertains not only to theology
sed etiam ad scientiam canonistarum spectat aliquas but also to the science of the canonists to approve some
veritates catholicas approbare et aliquas hereses catholic truths and to disapprove of some heresies,
7

