sceleratis incorrigibilibus liberandis nullus intercedere intercede before a judge on behalf of guilty individuals
debet (23 q. 4 c. Est iniusta), et ideo licet hereticis who must be punished, and yet no one has the duty of
impugnantibus catholicam veritatem sint quedam opera interceding for the liberation of incorrigible scoundrels
misericordie impendenda, defensio tamen que in (23 q. 4 c. Est iniusta). [Col. 915] Therefore while
favorem heretice pravitatis vel in preiudicium fidei certain works of mercy must be afforded to heretics who
christiane posset aliqualiter redundare est omnino oppose the catholic faith, nevertheless a defense which
subtrahenda, que tamen catholicis papam hereticum might in some fashion result in benefiting heretical
impugnantibus in favorem fidei orthodoxe a fidelibus wickedness or prejudicing the Christian faith must be
est prebenda.
completely denied to them, and believers must provide
the appropriate defense only to catholics who oppose a
heretic pope in support of orthodox belief.
Ad secundam potest dici quod omnia opera misericordie A possible response to your second objection is that all
pro aliquo tempore cadunt sub precepto, quemadmodum works of compassion are obligatory for a certain time,
amor proximi ex quo omnia opera misericordie just as the love of one's neighbor (from which all works
procedere debent cadit sub precepto. Et ideo defensio of compassion must proceed) is obligatory. And
impugnantium papam hereticum, circumstantiis debitis therefore the defense of opponents of a heretic pope is
observatis, cadit sub precepto, licet tale preceptum non obligatory when the relevant circumstances are there,
intelligatur pro omni tempore obligare.
even though the precept in question is not understood to
be obligatory at all times.
Discipulus: Pro quo tempore secundum istos obligat Student: According to these theorists when does this
hoc preceptum.
precept become obligatory.
Magister: Respondetur quod sicut dare eleemosynam Master: The answer is that just as a person who can
tenetur de necessitate ille qui potest cum ex parte afford it is necessarily bound to give alms when an
indigentis apparet evidens et urgens necessitas, nec scit obvious and urgent requirement exists on the part of the
alium quem probabiliter credit velle et posse needy, and the person does not know anyone else whom
necessitatem habentis indigentiam subvenire, sic tunc he probably believes to be willing and able to relieve the
tenetur quilibet qui potest modo defensionis sibi need of the individual in crisis, in the same way anyone
congruo et possibili impugnantes papam hereticum who can is obligated to defend, in the manner possible
defensare, quando tali defensione necessario indigent and relevant to his situation, opponents of a heretic pope,
nec apparet alius qui eis velit et possit tuitionem when these opponents necessarily require such a defense
impendere. Sicut etiam quando immineret periculum and no one else emerges who is willing and able to
fidei essent prelati a subditis arguendi et fides catholica provide protection. Indeed, just as when a danger to the
esset fideliter confitenda, sic quando ex omissione faith were imminent prelates would have to be verbally
defensionis impugnantium papam hereticum periculum confronted by subjects and catholic belief faithfully
fidei immineret vel subtraheretur honor Dei, essent stated, in the same way when a danger to the faith or a
impugnantes papam ab omnibus qui possunt, si non diminution of God's honour were imminent due to the
apparet alius qui eos protegeret, defendendi, et defense of a heretic pope's opponents being neglected,
quicumque eis in aliquo casu (videlicet predictorum) these opponents of the pope would have to be defended
defensionem debitam denegaret in peccatum mortale et by all those who could help [at that moment], if no one
fautoriam heretice pravitatis laberetur nec posset aliquis else would appear to protect them. And whoever would
nisi per solam impotentiam excusari.
in some appropriate situation deny these opponents the
defense owed to them would lapse into mortal sin and
become an aider and abettor of heretical wickedness, nor
might anyone be excused here save by lack of power.
Discipulus: De ista materia in septimo huius diligenter Student: I shall inquire carefully about this issue in the
inquiram. Ideo refer quomodo ad aliam instantiam 7th Book of this work. Therefore report how one
respondetur.
responds to another objection.
Magister: Ad illam instantiam dicitur quod aliquod Master: The response to the next objection is that some
genus defensionis solummodo pertinet ad iurisdictionem category of defense only pertains to those who wield
habentes, quemadmodum ad eos pertinet tantummodo jurisdiction, as for instance the regular punishment of
regulariter plectere delinquentes. Sed preter talem delinquents only pertains to them. However, besides this
defensionem, sicut dictum est in tertio notabili kind of defense, as was stated above in the third notable
suprascripto, sunt multi alii modi defendendi papam point, there are many other ways of defending the
hereticum impugnantes, qui aliis a iudicibus competere opponents of a heretic pope which might be relevant to
possunt. Sepe enim aliqui a violentiis aliorum solum individuals other than judges. Some indeed are
precibus defenduntur, unde et de tali modo defensionis frequently defended from the violence of others by
habetur dis. 87 c. Eos ubi sic legitur: "eos, qui ad prayers alone, whence such a method of defense is
ecclesiam confugiunt, tradi non oportet, sed loci sancti mentioned in dis. 87 c. Eos, [col. 305] where we read the
reverentia et intercessione defendi". Ex quibus verbis following: "it is not proper to surrender those who flee to
333

