delinquentes, et alio modo socii. Prelatus corrigit in accordance with everyone's rank in the state, peace
increpando et verberando, ut infra, eadem questione, being maintained". [c. Tollerandi col. 899] Here the
capitulo Forte. Socius vero admonendo et reprobando gloss notes [col. 1296] on the words "in accordance with
factum eius". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod non rank": "i.e. in accordance with the status and office of
solum prelati sed etiam alii tenentur corrigere everyone. For prelates must correct delinquents in one
delinquentes et iniurias aliis facientes, quod etiam idem way and partners in another. A prelate corrects by
Augustinus, ut habetur 23 q. 5 c. Non putes, sentire violent reproaches and physical blows, as further on in
videtur. Ait enim: "non putes, te tunc amare vicinum the same question, c. Forte, [c. 902] while a partner
tuum, quando eum non cedis". Et infra: "aut tunc amare issues warnings and verbal rejections of a partner's
vicinum tuum, quando non corrigis eum. Non est ista deed". From these words one is given to understand that
caritas sed languor". Ex quibus verbis habetur quod not just prelates but others also are obligated to correct
vicinus vicinum tenetur corrigere. Item, Anacletus, ut delinquents and those who harm others. Augustine
habetur 24 q. 3 c. Tam sacerdos, ait: "tam sacerdos himself appears to be of this sentiment, as 23 q. 5 c. Non
quam reliqui fideles omnes summam debent habere putes [col. 940] records. For he states: "don't think that a
curam de hiis, qui pereunt". Ergo ad omnes spectat refusal to withdraw from your neighbour is an indication
corrigere iniuriam inferentes.
of your love for him", and further on: "or that you are
loving your neighbour precisely when you are refraining
from correcting him. This is not love but idleness". One
concludes from these words that a neighbour is obligated
to correct a neighbour, Again, Anacletus states (we have
it in 24 q. 3 c. Tam sacerdos): "both the priest and all the
rest of the faithful must have the highest concern for
those who are dying spiritually". [col. 994] Therefore it
is everyone's business to correct those who do harm.
Discipulus: Scis quod multi hiis diebus tenent Student: You know that there are many these days who
doctrinam Thome de Aquino. Quare dic quid ipse sentit follow the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas. Therefore state
de hac re, an scilicet ad omnes spectat corrigere his feeling on this issue, namely whether it is the
delinquentes.
business of everyone to correct delinquents.
Magister: Ipse tenet quod sic. Nam 2a 2e, q. 33, Master: He maintains the affirmative. For here is what
articulo 3 dicit sic: "duplex est correctio. Una quidem he says in 2a 2ae q. 33 article 3: "correction is twofold.
que est actus caritatis, qui specialiter tendit ad Indeed there is one which is an act of love, and which is
emendationem fratris delinquentis per simplicem particularly concerned with the amendment of a
admonitionem. Et talis correctio pertinet ad quemlibet delinquent brother by way of a simple admonition. And
caritatem habentem, sive sit subditus sive prelatus". Et such a correction pertains to anyone who possesses
articulo quarto dicit sic: "correctio fraterna, que est charity, whether he is a subject or a ruler". [Summa
actus caritatis, pertinet ad unumquemque respectu Theologie, II-II, 33, 3, Responsio] And in article 4 he
cuiuslibet persone ad quam caritatem debet habere, si in says: "fraternal correction, which is an act of love,
eo aliquid corrigibile inveniatur".
pertains to anyone with respect to any person towards
whom he must have charity, if something is discovered
in the latter which requires to be corrected". [Summa
Theologie, II-II, 33, 4, Responsio]
Discipulus: Non adducas plura ad probandum quod Student: Do not present further material for the purpose
omnes tenentur corrigere iniuriari volentem, sed adhuc of proving that all are obligated to correct someone
proba quod socius tenetur socium iniuriam patientem wanting to do harm, but prove once again that a partner
defendere.
is obligated to defend a partner suffering harm.
Magister: Quinta ratio pro assertione predicta est hec. Master: Here is the fifth reason in support of this
Ad eundem spectat malum proximi removere, si potest, assertion. It pertains to the same person to avert evil
ad quem spectat bonum eiusdem, si potuerit, procurare. from his neighbour, if he can, whose business it is to
Sed quilibet tenetur bonum proximi procurare, quia provide good to this neighbour, if possible. But everyone
aliter caritatem ad ipsum minime habet. Ergo quilibet is obligated to provide good to a neighbour, for
tenetur malum alterius removere, si potest, et ita tenetur otherwise one does not demonstrate love towards him.
removere malum iniuriam patientis. Sed sepe hoc non fit Therefore everyone is bound to avert evil from someone
nisi ipsum defendendo. Ergo quilibet tenetur alium suffering harm. Frequently this cannot be done except by
defendere si potest.
defending the sufferer, therefore everyone is obligated to
defend another if he can.
Sexta ratio est hec. Non minus indiget in periculo Here is the sixth reason. An individual in peril does not
constitutus contra volentem iniuriari defendi quam need less defense against someone wanting to harm him
esuriens cibari et sitiens potari. Sed quilibet qui potest than a hungry person needs food and a thirsty person
tenetur esurientes cibare et sitientes potare si per alium needs drink. But everyone capable of doing so is
342

