gravissime quorum statum vel aliquid contingens statum more seriously in favouring a heretic pope than do
eorum papa hereticus erronee condempnaret.
secular clerks, and among religious they would sin most
seriously whose status or something pertinent thereto
the heretic pope would have erroneously condemned.
Discipulus: Qui peccant gravius, fautores pape heretici Student: Who sin more seriously, abettors of a heretic
vel credentes erroribus pape heretici.
pope, or those who believe his errors.
Magister: Respondetur quod si sunt aliqui fautores pape Master: One responds that if some are abettors of a
heretici qui non sunt credentes eius erroribus, credentes heretic pope but do not believe his errors, believers
eo quod sunt heretici gravius peccant quam fautores qui (because they are heretics) sin more seriously than
non sunt credentes. Aliter dicitur quod quia fautores abettors who are not believers. Another response is that
peccant scienter si non sunt credentes, credentes vero since abettors, if they are not believers, knowingly
ignoranter peccant, fautores gravius peccant quam commit a sin, while believers sin in ignorance, abettors
credentes.
sin more seriously than believers.
Discipulus: Qui peccant gravius, fautores vel defensores Student: Who sin more seriously, abettors or defenders
pape heretici.
of a heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod quia omnis defensor Master: The answer is that because every defender of
hereticorum est fautor eorum et non econverso, ideo qui heretics is their abettor, but not conversely, therefore
sunt defensores pape heretici gravius peccant quam qui those who defend a heretic pope sin more seriously than
sunt tantummodo fautores.
those who are merely abettors.
Discipulus: Qui peccant gravius inter defensores pape Student: Who among defenders of a heretic pope sin
heretici.
more seriously.
Magister: Respondetur quod inter defensores scienter Master: The answer is that among the conscious
pape heretici, gravius peccant reges et principes ac defenders of a heretic pope, it is the kings, the princes,
potentes qui potentiam pape heretici non formidant. and the powerful who do not fear the power of the
Inter defensores autem ignoranter pape heretici qui heretic pope, who sin more seriously. While among
laborant ignorantia, crassa et supina dampnabilior est in those who defend a heretic pope in ignorance, grossly
prelatis, et gravius peccant (et doctores et religiosi), passive ignorance is more to be condemned in prelates
quam in regibus et principibus qui rebus secularibus ex than in kings and princes whose normal function
officio sunt intenti.
consists in the administration of secular affairs, and it is
prelates who sin more seriously, along with doctors and
religious.
Discipulus: Dic de receptatoribus pape heretici, qui Student: State who sin more seriously among receivers
gravius peccant.
of a heretic pope.
Magister: Respondetur quod quanto receptatores pape Master: The answer is that to the extent that receivers
heretici muniuntur maiori potentia temporali et minus of a heretic pope are endowed with greater power and
timent potentiam temporalem pape heretici, tanto have less to fear from the temporal power of a heretic
gravius peccant. Et ideo gravius peccaret rex potens pope, to that extent do they sin more seriously. And
receptando papam hereticum quam dux vel baro, aut therefore a powerful king, by receiving a heretical pope,
castrum vel civitas, nisi ex aliqua causa rex plus haberet would sin more seriously than a duke, or a baron, or a
timere potentiam temporalem pape heretici quam alius fortress, or a city, unless for some reason this king
minoris potentie temporalis. Et ex isto concluditur quod, would have more to fear from the temporal power of a
ceteris paribus, inter omnes reges et principes, ille qui heretic pope than someone of lesser temporal power.
esset maioris potentie et quem plus timeret papa And from this one concludes that, other things being
hereticus, gravius contra Deum et christianitatem equal, among all kings and princes, he would be more
delinqueret si papam hereticum minime impugnaret.
seriously remiss against God and Christendom if he
refrained from opposing a heretic pope, who would have
greater power and who would be feared more intensely
by the heretic pope.
Capitulum 70
Chapter 70
Discipulus: De papa heretico ac credentibus, fautoribus, Student: As presently appears to me, we have discussed
defensoribus, et receptatoribus pape heretici, ut modo a number of issues concerning a heretic pope, and the
michi videtur, nonnulla discussimus. Nunc autem rogo believers, abettors, defenders, and receivers of a heretic
ut de gravitate periculi tempore pape heretici, si unquam pope. But now I would ask that you scrutinize the
aliquis papa a fide deviabit catholica, perscruteris, an seriousness of the danger which would arise in the time
scilicet tempore pape heretici grave imminebit of a heretic pope, if some pope should ever deviate from
periculum christianis.
the catholic faith, namely, whether, in the time of a
heretic pope, a serious danger would threaten Christians.
Magister: Interrogatio tua, ut eam proponis, aliquid Master: Your question, in the form in which you put it,
477

