pains than to sin mortally.
Discipulus: Prima pars istius sententie decretali Student: The first part of this opinion seems to
Innocentie 3ii, que ponitur Extra, De his que vi metusve contradict the decretal of Innocent III found in Extra,
causa fiunt, cap. Sacris, repugnare videtur. Ait enim: De his que vi metusve causa fiunt, c. Sacris. For he
"distinguimus autem utrum is, qui communicat states: "we should distinguish whether he who
excommunicatis invitus, sit per coactionem astrictus aut unwillingly communicates with excommunicated
per metum inductus. In primo siquidem casu talem non persons does this under pressure of force, or motivated
credimus excommunicatione teneri, cum magis pati, by fear. In the first situation, at any rate, we do not
quam agere convincatur. In secundo vero licet metus believe the individual in question to be obligated by the
attenuet culpam, quia tamen non eam prorsus excludit, excommunication, since he is clearly more a victim than
cum pro nullo metu debeat quis mortale peccatum an actor. But in the second case, although fear
incurrere, talem excommunicationis labe credimus diminishes guilt, it does not entirely exclude it, because
inquinari". Ex quibus verbis colligitur, ut videtur, quod no one must commit a mortal sin however strong the
nullus metus etiam mortis excusat corporaliter fear, and therefore we believe such an individual to be
communicantem excommunicato a peccato mortali. polluted with the stain of excommunication". [col. 220]
Cum ergo papa hereticus sit excommunicatus quia We gather from these words, it would appear, that no
incidit in canonem sententie promulgate, ut notat glossa fear, not even fear of death, excuses from the
24 q. 1 cap. Achatius sicut allegatum est supra, commission of a mortal sin someone who physically
quicunque communicat pape heretico, etiam corporaliter communicates with an excommunicated person.
tantummodo, excommunicationis sententia inquinatur. Therefore, since a heretic pope is excommunicated
because he falls under the sanction of a promulgated
judgement, as notes the gloss to 24 q. 1 c. Achatius, [s.v.
in heresim, col. 1382] earlier adduced in argument, [cf.
1 Dial. 6.19] whoever communicates with a heretic
pope, even if merely physically, is polluted by a
judgement of excommunication.
Magister: Ad hoc respondetur quod Innocentius 3us in Master: The answer to this is that Innocent III makes
decretali predicta de excommunicatione corporali no mention whatever of physical excommunication in
nullam facit penitus mentionem, et ideo pro morte the aforesaid decretal, and therefore one is permitted to
vitanda licitum est cuicunque excommunicato communicate physically with any excommunicated
communicare corporaliter. Nec potest ecclesia de individual in order to avoid death. Nor can the church
plenitudine potestatis artare quemcunque contra suam use its plenitude of power in this case to force anyone
voluntatem in tali casu excommunicatum vitare. Et ideo against his will into avoiding an excommunicated
Innocentius loquitur de communione non corporali sed individual. And therefore Innocent is not speaking of a
de aliqua alia, puta in crimine vel alio modo, que absque physical communication but of a different kind of
constitutione humana noscitur interdicta.
communication, for instance in crime, or in some other
fashion which is known to be forbidden independently
of human law.
Discipulus: Circa dictam responsionem due difficultates Student: I have two difficulties with respect to this
michi occurrunt. Prima est, quia videtur quod ecclesia, answer. The first is this. It appears that the church
que etiam summum pontificem comprehendit, penes (which also includes the supreme pontiff), in whose
quam plenitudo residet potestatis, potest precipere competence plenitude of power resides, may command
cuilibet catholico ut nullo metu mortis vel perditionis to any catholic not to communicate with an
rerum excommunicato communicet. Aliter enim excommunicated person even if threatened by death or
plenitudinem potestatis nequaquam haberet. Si autem loss of property. For otherwise the church would not
ecclesia potest hoc precipere, alius obedire tenetur. possess plenitude of power. And if the church may
Secunda est, quia si ecclesia non potest aliquem obligare command this, then one is bound to obey. The second
sub pena excommunicationis ut nec etiam metu mortis difficulty is this. If the church cannot obligate someone
corporaliter communicet excommunicato, videtur etiam under penalty of excommunication to refrain from
per eandem rationem quod per eandem penam non physical communication with an excommunicated
potest obligare fideles ne aliter quam corporaliter person even if threatened by death, it appears (for the
excommunicato communicent.
same reason) that the church cannot obligate the faithful
by the same penalty not to communicate with
excommunicated persons otherwise than physically.
Magister: Ad primam respondetur quod ecclesia non Master: The answer to the first difficulty is that the
potest aliquem obligare sub pena excommunicationis ut church cannot obligate someone under penalty of
nullo metu mortis vel perditionis rerum communicet excommunication to refrain from communicating with
excommunicato, cuius ratio assignatur talis. Ad illa que an excommunicated person even if threatened by death
supererogationis sunt vel excessive gravia dinoscuntur, or loss of property, and this for the following reason.
468

