nomine pertinacia vel pertinax nulla in evangelio mentio no mention is made of this word "pertinacity" or of
fiat, tamen de re significata sepe fecit Christus "pertinacious", yet Christ often spoke about what is
sermonem.
signified [by them].
Discipulus:: Ubi?
Student: Where?
Magister:: Ioannis 15, ubi ait de Iudeis, "Si non Master: At John 15[:22] where he says about the Jews,
venissem et locutus non fuissem eis , peccatum non "If I had not come and had not spoken to them, they
haberent. Nunc autem excusationem non habent de would not have sin, but now they have no excuse for
peccato suo", ubi Christus declarat Iudeos fuisse in suis their sin." Here Christ makes it clear that the Jews were
erroribus pertinaces quia sibi credere noluerunt. Unde pertinacious in their error because they refused to
subdit, "Si opera non fecissem in eis que nemo alius believe him. For that reason he adds below [v.24], "If I
fecit, peccatum non haberent. Nunc autem et viderunt et had not done among them the works that no other man
oderunt me et patrem meum", ubi eos pertinaces hath done, they would not have sin. But now they have
ostendit quia operibus credere noluerunt. Maliciam et seen and hated both me and my father." He shows here
pertinaciam Iudeorum indicat manifeste cum, ut habetur that they are pertinacious because they refused to
Matthei 11, exprobrat civitatibus que sibi credere believe in his works. He indicates the evil and
renuerunt.
pertinacity of the Jews clearly when he reprimands the
cities which refused to believe him, as we find in
Matthew 11[:21-24].
Capitulum 14
Chapter 14
Discipulus: QUANTUM adhuc intelligo plus michi Student: AS MUCH AS I understand, that second
placet assertio ista secunda, et ideo indica quomodo isti assertion still pleases me more. Indicate, therefore, how
ad rationes contrarias respondere nituntur.
they try to reply to the opposing arguments.
Magister:: Ad primam nonnulli respondent dicentes Master: Some reply to the first [argument] by saying
quod licet in genere theologi principaliter debeant scire that although in general it is chiefly theologians who
quis est pertinax iudicandus, tamen aliquem modum ought to know who should be judged pertinacious, yet in
specialem errantem de pertinacia convincendi magis ex some circumstances canonists reflect more purposefully
intentione propter aliquas circumstantias considerant on some particular way of convicting an errant of
canoniste, licet etiam de tali modo, si inter canonistas pertinacity (though, also, if doubt and disagreement
dubitatio et dissensio oriretur, ad theologos , applicando about this way were to arise among canonists it would
theologica et universalia ad particularia, spectaret pertain to theologians, by applying theological and
investigatione et deliberatione prolixa et magna. Unde universal [principles] to these particulars, to judge more
dicunt quod sunt multi modi deveniendi in notitiam profoundly and surely , although perhaps after a drawn
pertinacie alicuius errantis contra fidem, quorum aliqui out and long investigation and consultation). Thus they
respiciunt ordinem iudiciarium , puta si errans citatus ad say that there are many ways of arriving at knowledge
iudicium venire recusat , si veniens renuit respondere , si of the pertinacity of someone erring against the faith,
subterfugere iudicium et examinationem malitiose some of which have regard to the order of legal
molitur. Tales autem modos convincendi hereticos proceedings, for instance, if an errant called to trial
quantum ad circumstantias multas ordinem iudiciarium refuses to come, if he comes but refuses to reply, if he
respicientes magis explicite tractant canoniste quam wickedly tries to evade the trial and examination. Now,
theologi. In genere , tamen, et quantum ad multos alios canonists deal more explicitly than theologians with
modos convincendi de pertinacia , magis spectat ad such ways of convicting heretics with respect to many
theologos de pertinacia pertractare.
circumstances that pertain to the order of legal
proceedings. Yet in general and with respect to many
other ways of convicting of pertinacity it pertains more
to theologians to deal with pertinacity.
Discipulus: Potest aliquis convinci de pertinacia extra Student: Can anyone be convicted of pertinacity outside
iudicium?
a court?
Magister:: Nemo convincitur auctoritate officii extra Master: No one is convicted by the authority of office
iudicium vel sine iudicis auctoritate. Aliquis tamen extra outside a court, or without the authority of a judge;
iudicium convincitur quantum ad hoc, quod eius malitia nevertheless, someone is convicted outside a court in so
per evidentiam rei ad notitiam pervenit aliorum in far as his evil comes so much to the knowledge of others
tantum ut liceat absque temeritate ipsum pertinacem on the evidence of the facts that it is permissible without
hereticum reputare.
temerity to regard him as a pertinacious heretic.
Discipulus: Dic ad formam rationis illius prime .
Student: Speak to the form of that first argument.
Magister: Ad formam dicitur quod cum accipitur quod Master: In respect of its form it is said that when it is
nullus errans contra fidem est pertinax iudicandus nisi taken [as a premise] that no one erring against the faith
qui correctus a suo prelato suum defendit errorem , quod should be judged as pertinacious except someone who
hoc est manifeste falsum, quia sunt alii modi extra omne defends his error once he has been corrected by his
20

