si potentum fuerit favore munitus. Quicunque contra unusual methods of firmly opposing him, especially if
papam hereticum voluerit solumodo uti communibus, he were well protected by the support of the powerful.
erit forsitan similis medico imperito qui uno collirio Whoever would wish to merely employ common tactics
omnium oculos vult curare. Non sufficit autem against a heretic pope would perhaps resemble the
impugnatori idoneo pape heretici contra ipsum vias untalented doctor who wants to heal everyone's ocular
extraneas invenire, nisi, cum fuerit expediens, ipsas ailments with just one kind of eye-salve. Nor would it
curaverit effectui mancipare, ut, videlicet, non timeat suffice for the qualified opponent of a heretic pope to
aggredi novitates. Quamvis enim novitates inutiles, discover unusual tactics against him, unless he put them
perniciose, et periculose sint omnino vitande, novitates into practice given the opportunity to do so, and,
tamen perutiles, necessarie, et salubres sunt carius namely, did not fear to implement these novelties in
amplectende. Non est aptus ad quecunque ardua reality. For although useless, harmful, and dangerous
peragenda qui omnes horruerit novitates. Si Alexander innovations are to be entirely avoided, innovations
Macedo novitates aggredi timuisset, maiorem partem which are quite useful, necessary, and salutary should
mundi sibi nullatenus subdidisset. Si civitas Romana be eagerly embraced. He who would abhor all novelties
novitates minime attemptasset, nunquam pacem in is ill-equipped to engage himself in difficult tasks. Had
universo orbe fecisset. Quid loquar de seculi hominibus, Alexander the Macedonian feared to implement
cum apostoli, si novitates inducere formidassent, ad novelties, he would not have conquered most of the
novam legem gentes nullatenus convertissent. Non sunt world. Had the city of Rome not performed novelties, it
ergo novitates penitus respuende, sed sicut vetusta cum would never have established peace in the whole world.
apparuerint onerosa sunt omnimode abolenda, ita But why do I speak of secular personalities, when the
novitates cum utiles, fructuose, necessarie, et apostles, had they been afraid to introduce novelties,
expedientes secundum rectum iudicium videbuntur, sint would not have converted peoples to the New Law.
animosius amplectenda. Non autem sufficit impugnatori Therefore innovations are not to be unreservedly
idoneo pape heretici novitates, cum opportunum fuerit, rejected, but, just as old ways are to be entirely
attemptare, nisi etiam, cum expediens fuerit, periculis et abolished should they appear burdensome, so must
laboribus et etiam morti, si opportuerit, se exponat. Qui innovations be heartily embraced when they shall
enim omnia pericula expavescit, similis est illi de quo appear useful, fruitful, necessary, and expedient by
dicitur Ecclesiasti 11: "qui observat ventum non reference to right reason. And, furthermore, it does not
seminat, et qui considerat nubes nunquam metet".
suffice for the qualified opponent of a heretic pope to
embark upon innovations when the opportunity to do so
arises, unless he also, when expediency demands,
exposes himself to dangers, labours, and even death if
need be. For he who takes fright at all dangers is similar
to the person about whom Ecclesiastes 11 states: "he
that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that
regardeth the clouds shall not reap". [Ecclesiastes 11:4]
Rursus, si habet divitias, debet esse paratus expensas Again, if he possesses wealth, he should be prepared for
effundere, quia nulla eleemosyna corporalis extra considerable expenses, for no physical alm is as
articulum necessitatis extreme est ita necessaria. Neque indispensable as this one, save for such as would be
enim monasteriorum constructio, neque pauperorum forthcoming in a situation of extreme necessity. Indeed,
quorumcunque sustentatio, neque ecclesiarum edificatio, neither the construction of monasteries, nor the
neque miserabilium personarum defensio, neque sustenance of all categories of the poor, nor the building
captivorum redemptio, neque pro terre sancta of churches, nor the defense of miserable persons, nor
recuperatione largitio, potest equiparari expensis que the ransoming of captives, nor the financial contribution
fiunt ad impugnandum papam hereticum et fidem towards the reconquest of the Holy Land, can be
catholicam defendendam et exaltandam, eo quod compared to the expenses which need to be incurred in
exaltatio et defensio fidei catholice est omnibus order to combat a heretic pope, and to defend and exalt
temporalibus preferenda.
the catholic faith, because the exaltation and defense of
the catholic faith must take precedence over all temporal
concerns.
Amplius, impugnator idoneus pape heretici perditionem Further, the qualified opponent of a heretic pope should
rerum, honorum, et fame nullatenus expavescat. Hec not fear the loss of property, of honours, and of
enim omnia sunt inter bona minima computanda. Nec reputation. For all these should be reckoned among the
propter ista est defensio fidei aliquatenus obmittenda. least weighty of goods. Nor should the defense of the
Quamvis enim unusquisque, si convenienter potest, faith be in any way renounced on their account. For
famam suam, que inter omnia temporalia preeminere although everyone is obligated, if conveniently possible,
videtur, ad edificationem proximi et propter scandalum to reserve one's good reputation (apparently the most
evitandum servare tenetur, propter ipsam tamen significant of temporal goods) for the edification of
servandam non est defensio fidei relinquenda. Quia neighbours and to avoid scandal, the defense of the faith
486

