et hoc non simpliciter, sed quoad aliquid et quoad quid. human judgement, and furthermore, not in some
Nolo enim intricatas et secundum aliquos fantasticas absolute fashion, but by reference to specific
questiones in hoc opere pertractari.
circumstances and events. For I don't want involved
(and according to some, fantastic) questions to be
analyzed in this work.
Magister: Ad intentionem tuam dicunt nonnulli quod, Master: Focusing on your intention, one responds that
secundum humanum iudicium, credentium hereticis et there are a few thinkers who say that, according to
heretice pravitati gravius peccant literati quam illiterati, human judgement, of those who believe heretics and
quia literati, ceteris paribus, possunt facilius cognoscere heretical wickedness, the learned sin more seriously
veritatem. Item, inter literatos gravius peccant, ceteris than the unlearned, because the learned, other things
paribus, theologi quam alii, et inter theologos gravius being equal, may come to know the truth more easily.
peccant illi qui magis nutriti fuerunt in contraria veritate. Again: among the learned, other things being equal, the
Si enim aliquis papa vel alius dogmatizaret et asserere theologians sin more seriously than do the others, and
conaretur errores quorundam magistrorum Parisiensium among the theologians, they sin more seriously who
a summis pontificibus condempnatos, qui statum were more comprehensively educated in the contrary
mendicantium, scilicet Predicatorum et Minorum, truth. For if some pope, or someone else, were to
erronee dampnaverunt, inter omnes credentes erroribus officially teach and attempt to assert the errors of certain
illis pape vel alterius, Predicatores et Minores gravius Parisian masters condemned by supreme pontiffs,
delinquere noscerentur. Quia quanto magis aliquis masters who had erroneously criticized the status of
cognoscit vel habet cognoscere veritatem, tanto magis mendicants, namely that of the Preachers [Dominicans]
peccat si veritatem negat eandem. Cum ergo ad and of the Minors [Franciscans], it is these very
Predicatores et Minores specialissime spectat Preachers and Minors who would be known to have
cognoscere veritatem status sui, magisque quam alii sint committed the more serious offence among all the
in notitia status sui nutriti, si, cupientes pape placere vel believers of such errors of the pope or of someone else.
ex alia causa credent erroribus quibus status dampnatur For to the extent that someone has or is in a position to
eorum, magis quam alii, ceteris paribus, peccare have a greater knowledge of some truth, to that extent
noscuntur. Et si illi errores in fidem impingunt, non does he commit a more serious sin if he denies that
solummodo ordinum suorum sed etiam proditores truth. Therefore, since it pertains most specifically to
christianitatis sunt censendi, nec unquam christianitas Preachers and to Minors to know the truth of their
poterit de eis confidere tempore temptationis. Si enim status, and since they were more intensely educated than
ille est proditor veritatis qui non libere pronuntiat others in the knowledge of their status, if, desiring to
veritatem quam pronuntiare oportet (11 q. 3 Nolite), please the pope or for some other reason, they believe
multo fortius ille est proditor veritatis qui credit errori the errors by which their status is criticized, they are
quem antea reputavit errorem. In casu ergo predicto et in known, other things being equal, to be committing a
omni consimili Predicatores et Minores ultra omnes greater sin than others. And if these errors impact on the
peccarent huiusmodi credendo erroribus. Inter ipsos faith, they must be understood to have not only betrayed
autem gravius peccarent literatiores, sive essent magistri their Orders, but Christendom as well, nor may
sive discipuli. Sepe enim hiis diebus discipuli superant Christendom ever have confidence in them in a time of
magistros in veritatis cognitione. Nam quia acceptatores temptation. For if he is a traitor to the truth who does
personarum ad magisterium ambitiosos exaltant, plures not freely profess a truth which needs to be proclaimed
magistri istis temporibus rursum indigent ut doceantur (11 q. 3 Nolite), [cols. 649-650] all the more strongly is
que sunt elementa exordii sermonum Dei, et facti sunt someone a traitor to the truth who believes an error
quibus lacte opus sit, non solido cibo, et ideo literatiores, which he previously considered to be such. Therefore in
sive sint discipuli sive magistri, gravius peccant the case just mentioned, and in any similar cases,
credentes erroribus.
Preachers and Minors would sin beyond all others by
believing these errors. And among them those more
learned would sin more seriously, whether they were
masters or students. For in our times, students are
frequently superior to masters in knowledge of the truth.
Indeed, because those prone to show undue favouritism
to persons elevate the ambitious to master status, many
masters in our times are again in dire need of being
taught the rudimentary elements of the words of God,
and have become as those who require milk rather than
solid food. Therefore those who are more learned,
whether they are students or masters, sin more seriously
by believing errors.
Discipulus: Qui peccant gravius inter fautores pape Student: Who sin more seriously among the abettors of
heretici et sequacium eius.
a heretic pope and his followers.
474

