recusationem suspensa est iurisdictio alicuius et appeal or demurrer frequently suspends someone's
potestas, vel quantum ad aliquam causam determinatam jurisdiction or authority, either with respect to some
vel quantum ad omnem causam, ita propter particular case or with respect to all cases, so may an
appellationem vel recusationem potest potestas pape appeal or demurrer suspend the pope's authority with
suspendi quo ad quedam precepta, ne videlicet aliquid respect to certain commands, namely so that he might
precipiat ante decisionem cause in preiudicium not order something which would prejudice the appellant
appellantis vel etiam recusantis. Et quemadmodum or the person issuing a demurrer prior to the case being
propter appellationem vel recusationem huiusmodi est decided. And just as such an appeal or demurrer
suspensa potestas pape quo ad precepta in preiudicium suspends the authority of the pope with respect to
appellantis, ita omnes subditi pape scientes commands which prejudice the appellant, so likewise all
appellationem vel recusationem huiusmodi interiectam, subjects of the pope who know that such an appeal or
licet nesciant causam esse legitimam, absoluti sunt ab demurrer has been issued (although they do not know if
obedientia pape quo ad precepta in preiudicium the cause is legitimate) are absolved from papal
appellantis vel recusantis. Et ideo sicut tunc papa non obedience with respect to commands which prejudice the
debet precipere aliquid in preiudicium appellationis vel appellant or the person who issued a demurrer. And
recusationis huiusmodi, ita subditi sui quo ad hoc sibi therefore just as the pope must not order at this time
nullatenus obedire tenentur.
something which prejudices such an appeal or demurrer,
so are his subjects in no way bound to obey him in this
context.
Capitulum 48
Chapter 48
Discipulus: Miror quod dicitur potestatem pape posse Student: I am surprised by the statement that anyone's
suspendi per appellationem vel recusationem appeal or demurrer can suspend the pope's authority,
cuiuscunque, cum nullus habeat suspendi nisi ab homine since no one can be suspended except by man or by law.
vel a iure. Papa autem ab homine suspendi non potest, But the pope cannot be suspended by man, since no one
cum nullus sit eo superior. Nec potest suspendi a iure, is his superior. Nor may he be suspended by law,
quia quicunque suspensus est a iure vel est suspensus a because whoever is suspended by law is suspended
iure naturali vel a iure divino vel a iure positivo. Sed either by natural law or by divine law or by positive law.
potestas pape per huiusmodi appellationem vel But the authority of the pope is not suspended by natural
recusationem non est suspensa a iure naturali cum law as a result of such an appeal or demurrer, since
appellationes et recusationes non sint a iure naturali sed appeals and demurrers are of human establishment and
ab inventione humana. Nec est suspensa a iure divino so do not stem from natural law. Nor is it suspended by
propter idem, nec a iure positivo quia in toto iure divine law, for the same reason. Nor is it suspended by
positivo de tali suspensione nulla penitus mentio positive human law, since no mention whatsoever of
reperitur.
such a suspension can be found in the entire positive
law.
Magister: Isti de vocabulo 'suspensionis' nolunt Master: These theorists have no wish to quarrel about
contendere, et ideo qualitercunque accipiatur in iure, the term "suspension", and therefore whatever may be its
ipsi in hoc casu utuntur nomine 'suspensionis' secundum technical meaning in legal parlance, in the present
quod importat potestatem in alium ex causa minime instance they are using the word "suspension" to indicate
exercendam. Et isto modo dicunt potestatem pape aliquo that for cause authority must not be exercised over
modo suspensam per talem appellationem vel another person. And in this way they say that the
recusationem, quia scilicet papa de necessitate salutis authority of the pope is suspended in a certain manner by
tenetur non exercere potestatem in appellantem vel such an appeal or demurrer, namely because the pope is
recusantem
in
preiudicium
appellationis
vel bound by necessity of salvation not to exercise his
recusationius ipsius. Et ista suspensio est a iure nature, authority over the appellant or the person entering a
quia ex dictamine naturali. Dictat enim ratio naturalis demurrer so as to prejudice his appeal or demurrer. And
quod si aliquis appellat vel recusat iudicem ex causa que this suspension is by the natural law, because it proceeds
si esset probata deberet legitima reputari, iudex from a natural dictate. For natural reason decrees that if
antequam appellans vel recusans de malitia convincatur anyone appeals from or enters a demurrer against a judge
non debet potestatem exercere in ipsum in preiudicium for a cause which if proved would have to be considered
appellationis vel recusationis ipsius. Et cum dicis quod legitimate, the judge must not exercise authority over
appellationes et recusationes non sunt a iure naturali sed him in prejudice of his appeal or demurrer before the
ab inventione humana, respondetur quod ex hoc non appellant or the person entering the demurrer is
sequitur quod talis suspensio non sit a iure naturali. convicted of malice. And when you argue that appeals
Peccata enim non sunt a iure naturali, cohibitio tamen and demurrers do not stem from natural law but are
peccatorum est a iure naturali pro statu nature corrupte, humanly established, the answer is that it does not follow
licet non pro statu nature institute. Similiter posset dici from this that such a suspension is not authorized by
quod talis suspensio est a iure divino quia ex iure divino natural law. Sins, for instance, are not from natural law,
potest ostendi quod papa non debet in talem potestatem but their repression is authorized by natural law in the
359

