"Mortem enim languentibus probatur infligere qui hanc
cum possit non excludit." Ecce quod septem summi
pontifices sentencialiter et vocaliter asserunt manifeste
quod potest quis facere que non facit; quod
sentencialiter multi alii pape in scriptis suis affirmant,
et per consequens secundum eos non omnia de
necessitate eveniunt sicut asserit Iohannes 22. Ergo vel
iste erravit vel alii erraverunt, et constat quod hoc
tangit fidem. Ergo aliquis summus pontifex contra
fidem erravit.

Pope Symachus says, "For he is proved to inflict death
on the weak who does not prevent this when he can."
See! Seven highest pontiffs implicitly and explicitly
affirm clearly that someone is able to do something
that he does not do. Many other popes assert this
implicitly in their writings; and, as a consequence,
according to them not everything happens of
necessity, as John XXII affirms. Therefore, either he
has erred or they have erred, and it is certain that this
[question] touches on faith. Therefore some highest
pontiff has erred against the faith.

Capitulum 3

Chapter 3

Discipulus Illa que tangunt dominum Iohannem 22
volo usque ad tractatum de dogmatibus ipsius differre.
Nunc vero raciones pro assercione predicta producas in
medium.

Student: I want to postpone until the treatise on the
dogmatic teachings of the lord John XXII those
matters which refer to him. So would you now bring
forward for examination arguments for the above
assertion.

Magister Quod papa intrans canonice possit postea
ante omnem renunciacionem spontaneam non solum
errare sed eciam heretica pravitate fedari multis
racionibus in scripturis fundatis autenticis assertores
prefati probare conantur. Est autem prima racio talis.
Omnis purus viator habens usum racionis non
confirmatus in gracia potest contra fidem errare et
eidem errori pertinaciter adherere, quia talis potest
veritati que non est per se nota nec per experienciam
certam accepta nec est sibi demonstrative probata, si
voluerit, dissentire et eius contrariam opinari, quia
secundum beatum Augustinum credere nullus potest
nisi volens. Sed papa est purus viator et non
comprehensor; si enim esset comprehensor errare non
posset. Papa eciam est habens usum racionis, ut
communiter. Si enim per infirmitatem vel senectutem
vel aliquam aliam causam perderet usum racionis ex
tunc quamdiu usu racionis careret hereticari non posset,
quemadmodum pueri, amentes et eciam dormientes
statu illo durante hereticari non possunt; papa insuper
non est confirmatus in gracia cum possit peccare. Ergo
papa talis potest veritati que non est per se nota nec per
experienciam certam accepta nec est sibi demonstrative
probata, si voluerit, dissentire. Multe autem sunt
catholice veritates que nec sunt per se note nec per
experienciam certam accepte nec sunt pape
demonstrative probate, cum dicat beatus Gregorius
quod fides non habet meritum cui humana racio prebet
experimentum. Ergo huiusmodi veritatibus papa potest,
si voluerit, dissentire et per consequens pravitate
heretica poterit irretiri.

Master: Those who assert it try to prove by many
arguments based on authoritative writings that after
entering [office] canonically a pope not only can err
before any voluntary renunciation [of it] but can even
be stained by heretical wickedness. Now their first
argument is as follows. Any mere pilgrim who has the
use of reason but has not been confirmed in grace can
err against the faith and adhere pertinaciously to that
same error, because such a one can, if he wishes,
disagree with a truth which is not self-evident nor
learnt by sure experience nor proved to him
demonstratively and can opine its opposite, because
according to blessed Augustine no one can believe
except of his own will; but the pope is a mere pilgrim
and not one who has apprehended, for if he were one
who has apprehended he would not be able to err. A
pope is also someone who has the use of reason,
generally speaking, for if he were to lose the use of
reason through sickness, old age, or some other reason
he would for that reason not be able to become a
heretic as long as he lacked the use of reason, just as
children, those who are insane or even those merely
sleeping can not become heretics as long as that state
lasts; moreover the pope has not been confirmed in
grace since he is able to sin. A pope like this,
therefore, can, if he wants to, disagree with a truth that
is not self-evident nor learnt by sure experience nor
proved to him demonstratively. However, there are
many catholic truths which are not self-evident, have
not been learnt by sure experience and have not been
proved demonstratively to the pope, since blessed
Gregory says that faith for which human reason offers
proof does not have merit. If he wishes, therefore, a
pope can disagree with truths of this kind, and
consequently he can be entangled in heretical
wickedness.

173

