iurisdictionem haberet.

appeal or demurrer, since if this case were proved it
would have to be considered legitimate. Indeed, if such
an appellant were to prove legitimately that the pope
holds the Christian faith to be false, the pope would have
jurisdiction neither over the appellant nor over any other
Christian.
Secunda ratio talis est. Appellationi vel recusationi illius The second reason is this. One must defer to an appeal or
deferendum est (antequam constet eum frustratorie seu demurrer of someone who is allowed to appeal from or
malitiose procedere) cui licet pro causa quam allegat ab enter a demurrer against another in the case which he is
alio appellare vel alium recusare, quia sicut omni arguing before it is established that he has proceeded
appellationi vel recusationi legitime deferendum est ita with calculated hindrance or malice. Because just as one
etiam omni appellationi et recusationi quam non constat must defer to every legitimate appeal or demurrer, so
esse illegitimam deferendum est. Sed catholico licet a must one likewise defer to every appeal or demurrer
papa appellare vel papam recusare si papa asserit fidem which has not been shown to be illegitimate. But a
christianam esse falsam. Ergo si pro causa hac quis catholic is allowed to appeal from or enter a demurrer
appellat a papa vel eum recusat pro iudice, antequam against the pope if the pope asserts that the Christian
constet talem appellationem vel recusationem non esse faith is false. Therefore if someone appeals from the
legitimam tali appellationi vel recusationi deferendum pope for this cause, or enters a demurrer against him as
est. Sed non potest constare talem appellationem vel judge, such an appeal or demurrer must be honoured
recusationem non esse legitimam nisi constiterit causam before its illegitimacy is established. But it cannot be
allegatam esse falsam. Ergo antequam constet causam established that such an appeal or demurrer is
allegatam esse falsam deferendum est appellationi vel illegitimate unless it were established that the cause
recusationi huiusmodi.
alleged was false. Therefore prior to it being established
that the cause alleged is false, one must defer to an
appeal or demurrer of this kind.
Tertia ratio talis est. Si appellationi vel recusationi The third reason is this. If such an appeal or demurrer is
huiusmodi est minime deferendum, aut hoc est quia not to be honoured, this is (1) because the cause alleged
causa assignata si esset probata non deberet legitima in the appeal or demurrer, if proved, would not have to
reputari, aut quia ille a quo appellatur vel qui recusatur be considered legitimate; or (2) because he from whom
est talis persona a qua pro causa tali appellare non licet, appeal is made or against whom demurrer is entered is a
vel quia appellans vel recusans est talis persona cui person from whom one is not allowed to appeal in such a
specialiter est interdictum a iure ne pro tali causa cause; or (3) because the appellant or the one entering a
appellet, vel quia appellans vel recusans infra tempus demurrer is the kind of person especially forbidden by
statutum a iure non appellat vel non recusat, vel suam law to appeal for such a cause; or (4) because the
appellationem vel recusationem nequaquam prosequitur, appellant or the one entering a demurrer does not appeal
vel quia in forma appellationis aliqua que deberent or enter a demurrer within the time frame specified by
inferri obmittuntur. Quia si aliqua appellatio vel the law, or does not follow up on his appeal or demurrer;
recusatio repellitur, aut est repellenda propter causam or (5) because some elements which ought to have been
non legitimam si etiam esset probata, vel propter included are omitted in the form of the appeal. For if a
defectum appellationis aut prosecutionis, aut propter particular appeal or demurrer is rejected, it must be
obmissionem temporis a iure statuti, vel propter rejected either because a cause would not be legitimate
conditionem persone a qua appellatur vel recusatur, vel even if proved, or because of a defect in the appeal or the
propter conditionem persone appellantis vel recusantis. ensuing procedure, or because of a lapse in the time
frame specified by the law, or because of the position of
the person who is being appealed from or against whom
demurrer is entered, or because of the position of the
person appealing or entering a demurrer.
Sed propter primum non est dicendum quod tali But the first option does not entitle one to say that one
appellationi vel recusationi est minime deferendum, must not defer to such an appeal or demurrer, since the
quia causa assignata (quod papa videlicet tenet et asserit cause alleged, if proved (namely that the pope holds and
fidem christianam esse falsam) est talis que si esset asserts the Christian faith to be false) is such as ought to
probata deberet ab omnibus catholicis sufficiens et be considered sufficient and legitimate by all catholics.
legitima reputari. Nec propter secundum, quia a papa si The second option is no better, because it is permitted to
asserit et tenet fidem christianam esse falsam licet appeal from a pope if he asserts and holds that the
appellare, imo est ab omnibus catholicis evitandus. Nec Christian faith is false; indeed such a pope must be
propter tertium est tali appellationi vel recusationi avoided by all catholics. Nor must one refrain from
minime deferendum, quia ponatur quod appellans seu honouring such an appeal or demurrer because of the
recusans sit bone fame quando appellat vel recusat et third option, since the assumption is that the appellant or
talis contra quem nichil obici possit, imo ponatur quod the one entering a demurrer is of good reputation at the
351

