sententia lata contra matrimonium non transit in rem Quod Deo) [col. 1251] even if there was no appeal from
iudicatam quin revocetur sententia quandocunque error the judgement, because a judgement rendered against
sententie fuerit detectus". Ergo multo magis a sententia matrimony is not legally conclusive, and will be revoked
lata contra catholicam fidem non est necesse appellare. whenever an error in it shall have been detected". [col.
Quinto sic. Causa fidei est magis favorabilis et per 879] Therefore all the more is it not necessary to appeal
consequens privilegiis debet gaudere maioribus quam from a judgement rendered against the catholic faith.
causa matrimonii vel quecunque causa civilis. Sed causa Here is the fifth argument. The cause of faith is more
matrimonii et nonnulle cause civiles tali privilegio significant and consequently must enjoy greater
gaudent quod non est necesse ab iniqua sententia privileges than the cause of matrimony or any other civil
appellare. Ergo multo magis causa fidei tali debet cause. But the cause of matrimony and some civil causes
gaudere privilegio ut ab iniqua sententia contra fidem enjoy the privilege of it not being necessary to appeal
non sit appellare necesse.
from an unjust sentence respecting them. Therefore all
the more must the cause of faith enjoy the privilege of it
not being necessary to appeal from an unjust sentence
against the faith.
Capitulum 25
Chapter 25
Discipulus: Rationes adverto quare dicitur quod non est Student: I have a notion of the reasons why one states
absolute necessarium appellare a sententia lata contra that it is not absolutely necessary to appeal from a
fidem, sed ignoro quare ista assertio taliter modificatur, judgement rendered against the faith, but I do not
quod non est necesse appellare servando formam et understand why this assertion is modified by the clause
puncta que in appellationibus secundum iura humana that it is not necessary to appeal by observing the form
oportet servare. Unde rationem istius modificationis and the details which are usually observed in appeals
assigna.
according to human regulations. Kindly explain the
reason for this modification.
Magister: Ad intelligendum illud quod queris Master: We must make distinctions in order to answer
distinguitur, quia appellatio a sententia lata contra fidem your question intelligently. An appeal from a sentence
quadrupliciter accipi potest. Uno modo pro libello rendered against the faith may be verbally understood in
continente formam appellationis que communiter four different ways. One way is to mean by this a
consuevit in aliis appellationibus observari, notante document containing a formal outline of the appeal, as
videlicet personam appellantem et contra quam appellat has been the common practice observed in other appeal
et causam pro qua appellatur vel sententiam a qua situations, namely, an outline mentioning the person who
appellatur et tempus quo appellatur et alias is appealing, and the person against whom one is
circumstantias que ad appellationis formam debitam appealing, and the cause for which one is appealing or
requiruntur. Aliter accipitur appellatio pro voce qua quis the sentence against which one is appealing, and the time
absolute in presentia iudicis dicit "appello". Unde glossa frame of the appeal, and all other circumstances which
2 q. 6 par. Forma appellationis dicit: "si coram iudice are required to meet the proper formality of an appeal.
appellat sufficit si dicat 'appello'". Tertio accipitur Another acception of "appeal" is to mean by this the
appellatio pro impugnatione inique sententie late contra actual spoken expression, namely "I appeal", which
fidem, et sic quicunque impugnaret sententiam pape someone openly utters in the presence of a judge. Hence
latam contra fidem intelligeretur appellare ab eodem, the gloss to 2 q. 6 # Forma appellationum [col. 478]
licet non diceret "appello". Quarto potest dici appellatio states: "if he appeals in the presence of a judge it suffices
a sententia pape lata contra fidem omne factum quo if he says 'I appeal'". [col. 673] A third acception of
faciens ostendit se pape sententiam reprobare, detestare, "appeal" is to mean by this an active opposition towards
seu horrere, et isto modo clerici romani qui se a an iniquitous judgement rendered against the faith. In
communione Anastasii secundi, de quo habetur dis. 19 this perspective any one who actively opposed a
Anastasius, abegerunt, dici poterant appellatores quia sentence of the pope rendered against faith would be
facto ipsum tanquam hereticum reprobaverunt.
understood to be appealing from the pope, even if he did
not utter the words "I appeal". Fourthly, every act
whereby the actor demonstrates that he rejects and
detests the pope's sentence or is horrified by it may be
termed an appeal from a sentence of the pope rendered
against the faith. This is the way whereby the Roman
clerks who withdrew themselves from the communion of
Anastasius II (the account is in dis. 19 Anastasius) [col.
64] might have been designated as appellants, because
by their action they rejected this pope as a heretic.
Discipulus: Duo prima membra istius distinctionis Student: I understand the first two elements of the
intelligo, sed alia duo non videntur convenienter distinction, but the other two do not appear to have been
assignari, quia secundum tertium membrum omnis conveniently assigned. For according to the third
315

