noscuntur, et ideo sepe de hiis que in curia romana et in known to have little or no communication with one
aliis locis frequentibus publice fiunt multa ignorant que another, and therefore they are frequently ignorant of
aliis minime sunt ignota.
many events which occur in the Roman Curia and in
other crowded locations, events which are well known to
others.
Si igitur papa esset hereticus publicus, hoc est publice Let us assume that the pope was a public heretic, in other
diffiniens assertionem que est heresis explicite words that he publicly defined a statement which is an
condempnata vel publice predicans aut docens explicitly condemned heresy, or that he publicly
assertionem contra veritatem apud omnes catholicos preached or taught an assertion contrary to the truth
divulgatam, puta si publice predicaret Christum non established among all Catholics: for instance, if he
fuisse natum de virgine, vel resurrectionem non esse publicly preached that Christ was not born of a virgin, or
futuram, aut non esse infernum nec aliquas animas that there will be no resurrection, or that there is no hell,
cruciari in inferno, contra primos religiosos esset nor are some souls suffering in hell [an oblique allusion
violenta presumptio quod minime ignorarent papam to Pope John XXII's sermons on the Beatific Vision].
esse hereticum quia tales religiosi ea que publice fiunt There would be a very strong presumption against the
in curia romana non ignorant. Tot enim litteras sibi first kind of religious that they could hardly fail to know
mutuo scribunt, precipue de novitatibus que contingunt, that the pope is a heretic, because such religious are not
quod vix aliquid notabile fit in curia romana quin cito ignorant of public events occurring in the Roman Curia.
et in brevi tempore in omnibus locis eorum per Indeed they write themselves so many letters to and fro,
universum orbem publice cognoscatur, et ideo si particularly of freshly breaking developments, that
adheserint pape heretico postquam eius perfidia fuerit hardly anything of significance occurs in the Roman
publicata, presumendum est quod scienter adhererent Curia without being quickly and in short order publicly
pravitate heretice et ideo fautores heretice pravitatis known in all of their residences throughout the entire
sunt censendi si dixerint vel tenuerint papam esse world. Therefore if such religious were to support a
catholicum et fidelem.
heretic pope after his treachery had been made public,
one must presume that they knowingly supported
heretical wickedness, and therefore should they say or
hold that the pope is catholic and faithful, they are to be
judged collaborators in heretical wickedness.
Discipulus: Quid si non dixerint papam esse Student: What if they do not say that the pope is catholic
catholicum et fidelem, tamen sibi obediunt nichil de and faithful, and yet obey him while not dealing in any
eius fidelitate vel infidelitate se aliqualiter way with the issue of his faithfulness or faithlessness.
intromittendo.
Magister: Respondetur a quibusdam quod in hoc casu, Master: Some reply that in this case, if they cannot
si non possunt perfidiam pape ne transfundatur ad alios prevent the pope's treachery from actively influencing
prohibere, non sunt censendi fautores pravitatis others, they should not be thought collaborators in
heretice, sed sunt putandi fautores heretici, quia ex quo heretical wickedness, but should be reckoned to be
perfidiam pape heretici prohibere non possunt, nec collaborators of a heretic. Because they cannot prevent
credentes erroribus suis corrigere, nec ne alii credant the treachery of a heretic pope, nor correct those who
eius erroribus impedire, tacendo de eius perfidia non believe his errors, nor impede others from believing his
videntur culpam incurrere, sed obediendo sibi a culpa errors, they do not appear to be at fault by remaining
minime sunt immunes.
silent with respect to his treachery. But by obeying him
they are hardly immune from sin.
Discipulus: Dic de aliis religiosis.
Student: What about the other kind of religious.
Magister: De aliis dicitur quod non est presumptio tam Master: Of the others it is said that the presumption
violenta contra eos quod sciant vel teneantur scire against them is not as strong that they know or are bound
papam esse hereticum, et ideo non sunt subito iudicandi to know that the pope is a heretic. Therefore they must
favere heretice pravitati, vel quod peccent pape heretico not immediately be judged as favouring heretical
obediendo, sed examinandi sunt sollicite an sciant wickedness, or that they would sin by obeying a heretic
papam esse hereticum vel propter illa que audierunt pope. They must rather be carefully examined to
teneantur hoc scire, et secundum hoc vel culpabiles vel discover whether they know that the pope is a heretic or
a culpa liberi sunt censendi. Si enim ignorant papam whether they ought to know this because of the things
esse hereticum et non laborant ignorantia crassa et they have heard, and depending on the outcome of such
supina, obediendo pape heretico ab omni culpa sunt an examination they are to be thought either guilty or
immunes. Si vero sciunt papam esse hereticum vel free of guilt. For if they do not know that the pope is a
ignorant quia nolunt scire, aut laborant ignorantia heretic and do not labour in grossly passive ignorance,
crassa et supina, obediendo pape heretico peccant they are completely free of guilt in obeying a heretic
mortaliter nec possunt a culpa aliqualiter excusari.
pope. If on the other hand they know that the pope is a
heretic or don't know it because they don't want to know,
454

