supponit et aliquid querit. Supponit enim quod aliquis contains both an assumption and a query. For it assumes
erit papa hereticus. Querit autem quale tunc periculum that someone will become a heretic pope. And it asks
christianis instabit. De illo vero quod supponit fuerunt what danger will then threaten Christians. As to what it
opiniones, quibusdam dicentibus quod erit futurus papa assumes there were various opinions, some saying that
hereticus, aliis dicentibus quod temerarium fuit et est there would be a future heretic pope, others retorting
dicere quod erit papa hereticus, et temerarium est that is was and is foolhardy to state that there would be
negare. Circa illud etiam quod interrogatio tua querit, a heretic pope, but just as reckless to deny it. And with
sunt diverse opiniones. Una est quod, si unquam aliquis respect to what your question specifically asks, there
papa erit hereticus, non grave periculum fidelibus also exist diverse opinions. There is the view that, if
imminebit, quia cardinales, prelati, et magistri statim some pope ever became a heretic, no grave danger
sibi resistent, quibus reges et principes ac alii seculares would threaten the faithful, because the cardinals, the
potenter assistent, et ideo statim perfidiam pape heretici prelates, and the doctors would immediately resist him,
extirpabunt. Alia est opinio que de futuris non reputat and kings and princes and other secular authorities
divinandum. Tenentes enim opinionem illam dubitant would give them powerful assistance, and therefore they
quod si unquam erit papa hereticus, gravissimo periculo would immediately root out the heretic pope's treachery.
catholici exponentur, ita quod timent quod maius But there is another opinion which holds that one should
instabit periculum christianis si aliquis papa diu victurus not make guesses as to future events. Indeed, those who
erit hereticus quam si tota christianitas a sarracenis vel propound this opinion think it arguable that should there
aliis infidelibus caperetur.
ever be a heretic pope, catholics will be exposed to
extreme danger; and they fear that a greater peril will
threaten Christians if some pope should long prevail as a
heretic than if the whole of Christendom were to be
conquered by Saracens or by other non-believers.
Discipulus: Miror quod aliqui de hoc valeant dubitare, Student: I am astonished that some feel this to be an
quia si sarraceni omnes regiones christianorum per arguable point, for if the Saracens were to conquer by
potentiam subiugarent, omnes christianos extinguerent force all the Christian lands, they would eradicate or
vel subderent servituti. Papa autem hereticus hoc enslave all the Christians. A heretic pope, on the other
minime attemptaret, et ita ista opinio ratione carere hand, would hardly attempt this, and thus this second
videtur. De te tamen motivum eius audire desidero.
opinion appears to lack rational foundation. However I
would like to hear from you the motive of this opinion.
Magister: Si affectas scire motivum eorum, primo Master: If you wish to know what motivates the
opinionem eorum intelligas.
thinkers who advance this opinion, you should first
understand the substance of the opinion.
Discipulus: Puto quod intelligo.
Student: I believe I do.
Magister: Non apparet, quia tu videris intelligere de Master: This is not apparent, for you appear to
periculo temporali. Ipsi autem principaliter intelligunt de understand it as referring to temporal danger. They, on
periculo spirituali, quamvis etiam secundario intelligant the other hand, are primarily thinking of spiritual
de periculo corporali, quia dubitant quod papa hereticus, danger, although they also, secondarily, include physical
nisi refrenetur timore catholicorum, cogitabit omnes peril in their understanding, since they feel it arguable
christianos extinguere vel cogere aliam sectam that a heretic pope, unless restrained by his fear of
suscipere.
catholics, will plan to eradicate all Christians or force
them to adopt another religious persuasion.
Discipulus: Narra motivum eorum, intelligendo de Student: Outline their reasoning, understanding that it
periculo spirituali.
applies to spiritual danger.
Magister: Motivum eorum est tale. Quanto quis Master: Their reasoning is as follows. To the extent
pluribus modis quorum nullus impedit alium, sed that someone attempts to attack someone else by using a
quilibet efficacior sit per quemlibet, nititur aliquem number of methods, none of which obstructs the other,
expugnare, tanto illum citius superabit vel dubitandum but each of which is rendered more effective by
est quod citius superabit. Sed papa, si erit hereticus, convergence, to that extent will the attacker triumph
pluribus modis quam sarraceni, quibus tota christianitas more quickly over the enemy, or it is arguable that he
non posset corporaliter obviare, conabitur populum will so triumph. But the pope, if he becomes a heretic,
christianum expugnare et spiritualiter iugulare. Modi will attempt to conquer and spiritually destroy the
autem impugnandi quibus uteretur essent eque efficaces Christian people by methods more numerous than those
vel
efficaciores
quam
modum
impugnandi of the Saracens, which we assume that the whole of
sarracenorum. Unusquisque modus alium nequaquam Christendom would be unable to physically resist. And
impediet, sed quilibet quemlibet efficaciorem reddet. the methods of attack the heretic pope would use would
Ergo papa, si erit hereticus, citius quam sarraceni be just as effective or more effective than those of the
populum christianum spiritualiter superabit, vel Saracens. Each and every method of the pope would in
dubitandum est quod citius superabit. Spiritualiter autem no way obstruct the other, but each would rather make
478

