gift confirms him in faith; therefore he can err against
the faith.
Discipulus Ista racio non concludit quia probaretur per
ipsam quod concilium generale, ymmo tota
congregacio fidelium, posset errare contra fidem, quia
nullum donum supernaturale apparet collatum concilio
generali vel congregacioni fidelium per quod
confirmetur in fide, cum gracia et virtutes et dona
Spiritus Sancti viatores non confirment in fide; que
tamen inter omnia dona supernaturalia collata concilio
generali et congregacioni fidelium noscuntur esse
precipua.

Student: That argument is not conclusive because it
would be proved by it that a general council, indeed
the whole congregation of the faithful, could err
against the faith because no supernatural gift appears
to have been conferred on a general council or on the
congregation of the faithful by which it is confirmed
in faith, since grace and virtues and the gifts of the
holy spirit do not confirm pilgrims in the faith; yet
among all the supernatural gifts it is chiefly these that
are known to have been conferred on a general
council and the congregation of the faithful.

Magister Assertores predicti concedunt quod racio ista
sic nude sumpta non concludit, quia possibile est apud
Deum non solum congregacionem fidelium sed eciam
papam et quemlibet alium viatorem absque dono
supernaturali animam informante ab errore et heresi
preservare; per quem congregacio fidelium usque ad
consummacionem seculi absque omni heresi
permanebit immunis. Hoc tamen non debet neque de
persona neque de collegio affirmari nisi de qua vel quo
Deus revelavit quod numquam errabit contra fidem.
Deus autem hoc revelavit de congregacione fidelium et
non de papa, quare temerarium est dicere quod papa
intrans canonice numquam errabit contra fidem.

Master: Those who make that assertion grant that this
argument, taken barely like this, is not conclusive,
because it is possible for God to preserve from error
and heresy not only the congregation of the faithful
but also the pope and any other pilgrim at all without
a supernatural gift informing their soul; through him
the congregation of the faithful will remain immune
from every heresy until the end of the world.
Nevertheless this should not be affirmed of a person
or college unless God has revealed of the one or the
other that he or it will never err against the faith. God
has revealed this about the congregation of the
faithful, however, and not about the pope. It is
therefore rash to say that a pope entering [office]
canonically will never err against the faith.

Discipulus Alias raciones allega.

Student: Bring forward other arguments.

Magister Quarta racio eorum est hec: non minoris
efficacie et virtutis respectu actus fidei sunt
ecclesiastica sacramenta quam quecumque dignitas
ecclesiastica; sed per suscepcionem baptismi, qui
vocatur fidei sacramentum (Extra, De baptismo et eius
effectu), nullus confirmatur in fide quin postea possit
errare contra fidem; ergo per suscepcionem
cuiuscumque dignitatis ecclesiastice eciam papalis
nullus confirmatur in fide.

Master: Their fourth argument is this. Ecclesiastical
sacraments are not of less efficacy and power with
respect to an act of faith than is any ecclesiastical
dignity at all; but by the receiving of baptism, which
is called a sacrament of faith (Extra, De baptismo et
eius effectu [col.664]), no one is confirmed in faith so
that he can not afterwards err against the faith; no one
is confirmed in the faith, therefore, by the obtaining of
any ecclesiastical dignity at all, even the papacy.

Quinta racio talis est: non minus repugnat errori fides
et gracia quam quecumque dignitas ecclesiastica; ergo
non magis confirmatur quis per dignitatem
ecclesiasticam contra errorem et heresim quam per
fidem et graciam; sed nullus purus viator confirmatur
in fide per fidem et graciam quin postea possit errare et
heretica infici pravitate; ergo nullus per ecclesiasticam
dignitatem eciam papalem confirmatur in fide quin
postea possit heretica pravitate fedari.

A fifth argument is this. Faith and grace are not less
inconsistent with error than any ecclesiastical dignity
at all; someone is not more confirmed against error
and heresy by an ecclesiastical dignity, therefore, than
by faith and grace; but no mere pilgrim is confirmed
in faith by faith and grace, so that after [receiving
these] he can not err and be corrupted by heretical
wickedness. No one is confirmed in faith, therefore,
by an ecclesiastical dignity, even by the papacy;
indeed, afterwards he can be stained by heretical
wickedness.

Sexta racio est hec: tam papa iuste depositus quam

A sixth argument is this. Both a justly deposed pope

176

