quod ipsam dignam reprobacione maiori non censeo.
Ideo ipsa dimissa ad complendam materiam quam
incepi volo te aliam magis racionabilem breviter
pertractare. Queso enim ut michi reveles an aliqui
senciant quod tota multitudo Christianorum valeat
heretica pravitate fedari.

consider it worthy of further condemnation. So,
putting it aside, I want you briefly to investigate
another more reasonable one in order to complete the
matter that I began. For I ask you to disclose to me
whether some people think that the whole multitude
of Christians can be stained by heretical wickedness.

CAN THE WHOLE BODY OF CHRISTIANS BECOME HERETICS?
Magister Iudei et Sarraceni et pagani firmissime tenent
fidem Christianorum esse erroneam.

Master: Jews, Saracens and pagans maintain very
strongly that the Christian faith is wrong.

Discipulus Non intendo querere de illis sed de
Christianis,
sub
Christianis
eciam
hereticos
comprehendendo.

Student: I am not intending to ask about them, but
about Christians, including heretics too among
Christians.

Magister Nescio aliquem Christianum qui hoc teneat.

Master: I do not know any Christian who would
maintain this.

Discipulus Licet nescias Christianum aliquem hoc
tenere, tamen pro hoc aliquas raciones excogitare
nitaris.

Student: Although you do not know that any
Christian maintains this, would you nevertheless try
to think of some arguments for it.

Magister Ad conclusionem falsam nulla racio nisi
sophistica potest adduci.

Master: No argument except a sophistical one can be
brought forward for a false conclusion.

Discipulus Consencio quod pro assercione predicta
nulla valet racio nisi sophistica allegari, tamen sepe
raciones apparentes et difficiles ad solvendum pro falsis
inducuntur. Unde qualescumque invenire coneris.

Student: I agree that no argument except a
sophistical one can be adduced for that assertion; yet
arguments which are persuasive and difficult to
resolve are often introduced on behalf of falsities, so
would you try to find some like that.

Magister Quod tota multitudo Christianorum usum
racionis habencium possit contra fidem errare tali
racione probatur. Quantum ad possibilitatem errandi et
peccandi idem iudicium est habendum de multis et de
paucis arbitrii libertatem et peccabilitatem habentibus.
Sed parva multitudo Christianorum propter libertatem
arbitrii et peccabilitatem potest contra fidem errare.
Ergo et propter eandem causam tota multitudo
Christianorum potest contra fidem errare. Confirmatur
hec racio, quia ubi est eadem causa debet esse idem
effectus. Causa autem quare Christianus potest contra
fidem errare est quia nemo credit nisi volens, eo quod
articuli fidei non sunt de se evidentes. Sed ista causa
reperitur in tota multitudine Christianorum quia articuli
fidei non sunt evidentes toti multitudini, et ideo ipsa
non credit nisi volens. Ergo ita poterit tota multitudo
Christianorum errare sicut unus solus.

Master: That the whole multitude of Christians
having the use of reason can err against faith is
proved by the following argument. With respect to
the possibility of erring and sinning, the same
judgement should be made about many who have
freedom of will and ability to sin and about few who
have them. But on account of their freedom of will
and ability to sin a small multitude of Christians can
err against faith. For the same reason therefore, the
whole multitude of Christians can err against faith.
This argument is confirmed, because where there is
the same cause there should be the same effect.
However, the reason why a Christian can err against
faith is because no one has a belief unless they will it,
in that the articles of faith are not self evident. But
that cause is found among the whole multitude of
Christians because the articles of faith are not evident
to the whole multitude, and so they do not believe
except willingly. Therefore the whole multitude of
Christians will be able to err in the same way as one
single one can.

Secunda racio talis est. Illa multitudo que non est
confirmata in fide potest contra fidem errare, sicut illa

A second argument is the following. That multitude
that has not been confirmed in faith can err against

265

