Discipulus Vellem scire an omnes literati sentiant tales Student I want to know whether all the learned think
esse hereticos.
that such people are heretics.

Magister Quidam dicunt quod magis proprie debent
vocari fautores hereticorum et hereticae pravitatis quam
heretici tamen pertinaces secundum eos etiam poterunt
appellari quia pertinacia ad plura vitia quam ad heresim
se extendit.

Master Some people say that they should more
properly be called favourers of heretics and heretical
wickedness rather than heretics, yet they could,
according to them, also be called pertinacious because
pertinacity extends to more vices than to heresy.

[[Fr adds the following, similar to the opening remarks
of book 5 in Av et al.: Discipulus: licet mihi bene
videatur quod huiusmodi qui cum possunt heretice
pravitati non resistunt potius forent hereticorum
fautores nuncupandi tamen hic nolo plus de ipsis
inquirere Sed postea quando de fautoribus
receptatoribus et defensoribus hereticorum tractabimus
quamplura de ipsis investigare curabo Fr]]

[Fr adds: Student Although I see well that those who
can, but do not, resist such heretical wickedness should
rather be called supporters of heretics, I do not wish to
inquire further concerning them. Afterwards, however,
when we treat of the supporters, receivers and
defenders of heretics I will wish to ask many things
about them.]

WILLIAM
TEXT
BY JOHN SCOTT

OF

OCKHAM
AND

1

Dial.

5.1-5
TRANSLATION

Incipit liber quintus prime partis dialogorum docens
qui possunt pravitate heretica maculari.

The fifth book of the first part of the Dialogues
begins, teaching who can be defiled by heretical
wickedness.

Capitulum 1

Chapter 1

Discipulus Quia michi videtur quod qui non resistunt
pravitati heretice cum possunt sunt pocius hereticorum
fautores quam heretici nuncupandi de ipsis hic plus
nolo inquirere, sed postea quando de fautoribus
receptoribus et defensoribus hereticorum interrogabo
quam plura de istis eciam investigare curabo. Nunc
autem postquam quesivi quomodo potest quis convinci
esse hereticus, indagare propono qui possunt pravitate
heretica maculari. Et quia omnes christiani sentire
videntur quod tota multitudo Christianorum hereticari
non potest, quidam autem quod nec concilium
generale, aliqui vero quod nec Romana ecclesia,
nonnulli autem quod nec collegium cardinalium, alii
vero quod nec eciam papa potest heretica pollui
pravitate, ideo de istis quinque quid senciant Christiani
cupio ut michi reveles. Primo autem dicas an omnes
putent papam intrantem canonice hereticari non posse.

Student: Because it seems to me that those who do
not resist heretical wickedness when they can should
be called favourers of heretics rather than heretics, I
do not want to ask more about them here; but when I
question you later about favourers, harbourers and
defenders of heretics I will take care to find out more
about them too. But having inquired about how
someone can be convicted of being a heretic, I now
propose to investigate who can be defiled by
heretical wickedness. And because
all christians seem to suppose that the whole
multitude of christians can not become heretics,

164

with some supposing that a general council can not,
some on the other hand supposing that the Roman
church can not,
some supposing that the college of cardinals can not,
and some indeed supposing that even the pope can
not be soiled with heretical wickedness,
I want you therefore to reveal to me what christians

