supra proposui, an scilicet nescientes papam esse to return to the question which I had earlier proposed: [1
hereticum teneantur impugnantes papam de heretica Dial. 6.45] namely, whether those who do not know that
pravitate defendere, volo redire. Porro quia fundamenta the pope is a heretic are obligated to defend the
emulorum summi pontificis discutere cupio diligenter, opponents of a pope who impute heretical wickedness to
unum autem de fundamentis eorum est quod him. Moreover, since I would like to discuss carefully
appellantes, recusantes, accusantes et testificantes contra the fundamental theses of the supreme pontiff's enemies,
papam de heretica pravitate, ac adherentes et faventes and one of their fundamental theses happens to be that
eisdem sunt a cunctis catholicis etiam nescientibus appellants from the pope, people who enter a demurrer
papam esse hereticum defendendi, ideo posco ut against him, accusers of the pope, and witnesses against
ostendas quomodo possit probari quod impugnantes the pope concerning heretical wickedness, as well as
papam de heretica pravitate sunt tuendi a cunctis their supporters and abettors, must be defended by all
catholicis quibus non constat legitimis documentis quod catholics (even by those who do not know that the pope
taliter impugnantes inique procedunt. Volo autem sub is a heretic), I therefore request you to show how it can
nomine 'impugnantium' comprehendere appellantes, be proved that those who oppose the pope by alleging
recusantes, accusantes, testificantes contra papam et that he has lapsed into heretical wickedness are to be
adherentes et prebentes favorem, auxilium, et consilium protected by all catholics who do not conclude on the
supradictis et impugnationi eorum. Volo etiam uti basis of legitimate examples that these opponents are
nomine 'defensionis' largissime, scilicet pro defensione involved in a criminal act. By the way, I would like to
que fit quocunque modo, verbo vel facto vel include under the designation of "opponents": appellants,
taciturnitate vel omissione, secundum quod dicitur those who enter demurrers, accusers, witnesses against
aliquis alium defendere qui eum non prodit vel non the pope, and those who support and who provide
manifestat.
favours, assistance and counsel to the aforementioned in
their opposition activities. I would also like to use the
term "defense" in the widest sense, namely for a defense
provided by whatever method, by word, by deed or
action, or by silence and inaction, for instance when
someone who does not betray or surrender another is
said to be defending him.
Magister: Sic acceptis vocabulis 'impugnationis' et Master: Using the terms "opposition" and "defense" in
'defensionis', quod omnes catholici teneantur defendere the senses which you have suggested, one may proceed
impugnantes papam etiam catholicum de pravitate to demonstrate that all catholics are bound to defend the
heretica antequam constet legitimis documentis eos opponents of a pope (even of a catholic pope) to whom
malitiose procedere, ostenditur primo quadam ratione these opponents impute heretical wickedness, prior to it
que facta est prius cap. 44, que talis est. "Qui being established by legitimate examples that they acted
occasionem dampni dat dampnum dedisse videatur" with malice. One shows this to begin with by way of a
(Extra, De iniuriis et dampno dato, Si culpa). Ergo certain reason, which was advanced earlier in chapter 44.
similiter qui occasionem persequendi vel molestandi vel Here it is: "he who provides the opportunity for a loss
iniuriandi dat, persecutionem vel molestiam vel iniuriam appears responsible for the loss itself" (Extra, De iniuriis
intulisse videtur. Sed non defendens impugnantes et dampno dato, Si culpa). [col. 880] Therefore in the
papam de heretica pravitate, cum potest, occasionem same way, he who provides the opportunity for
persequendi vel molestandi vel iniuriandi dat, quia si persecution or disturbance or harm appears responsible
defenderet, ex quo potest, persecutionem vel molestiam for persecution or disturbance or harm. But he who does
vel iniuriam illatam vel inferendam excluderet. Ergo not defend, when he can, those who oppose the pope for
talis non defendens predictos predicta intulisse videtur cause of heretical wickedness, provides an opportunity
vel dinoscitur. Sed nullus debet impugnantibus papam for persecution or disturbance or harm, because if he
de heretica pravitate antequam constiterit eos malitiose offered defense, as he could, persecution or disturbance
procedere, persecutionem aut molestiam vel iniuriam or harm done or to be done would be excluded.
irrogare. Ergo quilibet qui potest eos tenetur defendere. Therefore this person in failing to defend papal
opponents appears or is known to have inflicted the
damage described. But no one must inflict persecution or
disturbance or harm on opponents of the pope who
impute heretical wickedness to the latter before it shall
have been established that they acted with malice.
Therefore everyone who can is obligated to defend them.
Discipulus: Dare occasionem dampni vel persecutionis Student: There are two ways in which one may provide
aut iniurie aut nocumenti contingit dupliciter, scilicet an opportunity for loss or persecution or harm or injury,
aut positive aliquid agendo vel loquendo, vel negative, namely either in an affirmative manner by doing or
scilicet aliquid omittendo. Qui primo modo dat saying something, or in a negative manner by omitting
occasionem dampni dampnum dedisse videtur, et something. He who provides opportunity for a loss in the
361

