sinner"[col. 916]. We gather from these words that
everyone is necessarily bound (to the extent that his
office and estate allows) to rebuke and to persecute the
sinner. Therefore it is proper that preachers and doctors
should proceed with such persecution according to the
method which corresponds to their function, namely by
condemning the treachery of a heretic pope.
Discipulus: Ex hac ratione haberetur quod predicatores Student: One might conclude from this argument that
et doctores deberent omnium hereticorum doctrinam preachers and doctors would be obligated to condemn the
erroneam reprobare, imo omnem peccatorem persequi false doctrine of each and every heretic, in fact that they
tenerentur, quod eis impossibile esse dinoscitur. Nullus would be bound to persecute every sinner, which is
autem ad impossibile obligatur.
clearly an impossible task for them. And no one has the
duty to perform the impossible.
Magister: Ad hoc respondetur quod sicut debemus Master: The answer to this is that just as we have the
diligere omnes proximos (et ideo papam tam hereticum duty to love all our neighbours (and therefore we are
quam catholicum tenemur diligere), non tamen bound to love a pope who is a heretic no less than a
omnibus possumus actu in speciali beneficia exhibere, catholic one), and yet we cannot demonstrate goodness
sed debemus esse parati tempore necessitatis pro posse to everyone specifically, but must be prepared when
omni indigenti succurrere. Ita omnes iniquos in necessary to assist everyone in need as best we can, so
quantum iniqui sunt odire tenemur, et secundum are we obligated to hate all the wicked in so far as they
preparationem cordis omnes persequi astricti sumus. are wicked, and we are bound to persecute them all with
Illum tamen qui deterior est et magis perniciosus potential readiness to act. But all Catholics are obligated
populo christiano fortiusque honorem Dei conatur to persecute more strongly and effectively someone who
minuere, omnes catholici fortius et melius persequi is more wicked and more destructive to the Christian
astringuntur. Et ideo cum papa hereticus sit deterior et people, and who attempts to lessen the honour of God
magis nocivus populo christiano quam alii minus mali, with greater force. And therefore since a heretic pope is
illum singulariter persequi debent catholici universi, et more wicked and more destructive to the Christian
ideo predicatores et doctores singulariter contra papam people than others of lesser wickedness, all Catholics
hereticum debent suum officium exercere, ipsum without exception must specifically target him for
efficacissime et doctrinam suam erroneam reprobando. persecution. Therefore preachers and doctors must
exercise their office specifically against a heretic pope,
condemning both him and his false doctrine with utmost
effect.
Discipulus: Si rationes alias cogitasti, allega.
Student: If you have thought of further arguments, bring
them forth.
Magister: Quinto principaliter arguitur sic. Sicut oculi Master: The fifth main argument is this. Just as the eyes
corporis materialis qui sibi et aliis partibus corporis of a material body are reckoned to be useless if they do
minime vident illa que sunt eis periculosa et nociva not see, for their benefit and that of other parts of the
(puta foveas, laqueos, hostes, bestias, et alia que body, those objects which are dangerous and harmful to
possunt inferre corpori lesionem) inutiles reputantur, all (for instance pits, snares, enemies, wild animals, and
sic oculi corporis spiritualis, puta ecclesie, qui sibi et other objects which may cause injury to the body), so the
ecclesie nequaquam monstrant pericula imminentia eyes of a spiritual body such as the church are to be
ecclesie universe inutiles sunt censendi. Oculi autem judged useless if they do not see and show for their
ecclesie sunt predicatores et doctores qui bona et mala, benefit and that of the church the dangers which threaten
virtutes et vitia, periculosa et utilia, debent aliis et sibi the universal church. But preachers and doctors are the
videri ac monstrare. Maximum autem periculum eyes of the church, and they must see and show to others
imminet ecclesie Dei quando papa est hereticus. Ergo si and to themselves good and bad, virtues and vices, perils
predicatores et doctores non vident nec monstrant and opportunities. And when the pope is a heretic, the
ecclesie periculum quod ex perfidie pape heretici greatest of dangers threatens the church of God.
ecclesie imminet orthodoxe inutiles sunt censendi.
Therefore if preachers and doctors neither see nor point
out to the church the danger that threatens the church of
true believers because of the treachery of a heretic pope,
they must be judged useless.
Sexto sic. Sicut ad testem pertinet in iudicio perhibere Here is the sixth argument. Just as it is the business of a
testimonium veritati, sic ad predicatores et doctores witness in court to testify to the truth, so does it pertain
spectat in suis sermonibus et lectionibus asserere to preachers and doctors to proclaim the truth in their
veritatem et veritati testimonium perhibere, imo sermons and lectures, and bear witness to it. Indeed
predicatores et doctores videntur testes veritatis. Unde preachers and doctors are perceived as witnesses of the
quia apostoli predicaturi et docturi veritatem fuerunt, truth. Hence, because the apostles were to preach and
439

