libri sanctorum, de quibus in distinctione praedicta fit
mentio, approbantur quo ad omnia quae nec per
auctorem nec per alios sunt correcta.

are not approved in their totality. Nevertheless, all the
books of the saints of whom mention is made in the
aforesaid distinction are approved with respect to
everything which is corrected neither by the author
nor by others.

Discipulus Isto modo liceret approbare libros
quorumlibet haereticorum, quia liceret approbare libros
eorum quo ad omnia quae per catholicos minime sunt
correcta. Omnem enim veritatem est licitum approbare.

Student In that way it would be permissible to
approve the books of any heretics at all, because it
would be permissible to approve everything in their
books in so far as it had not been corrected by
catholics. For it is permissible to approve every truth.

Magister Dicunt isti quod non est simile de libris
haereticorum et libris sanctorum, quia in libris
haereticorum falsa principaliter pertractantur et
asseruntur; pauca autem vera inveniuntur inserta. In
libris vero sanctorum vera principaliter intenduntur et
pauca reperiuntur contraria veritati; et ideo propter
pauca inutilia non sunt tanta utilia respuenda.

Master They say that there is no analogy between the
books of heretics and the books of saints, because in
the books of heretics it is chiefly falsehoods that are
investigated and asserted, while there are few truths
incorporated in them. But in the books of saints it is
chiefly truths to which attention is paid and there are
few things found that are opposed to the truth; and
therefore such greatly beneficial things should not be
rejected because of a few that are not beneficial.

Discipulus Adhuc explica mihi an isti putent omnes
veritates in libris sanctorum inventas catholicas esse
censendas.

Student Explain to me further whether they think that
all truths found in the books of saints should be
considered catholic.

Magister Nullatenus arbitrantur omnes veritates
tractatas in libris sanctorum esse catholicas. Unde
dicunt quod sancti aliqua tanquam catholica, quaedam
autem tanquam necessaria non ad fidem spectantia,
nonnulla vero tanquam probabilia tradiderunt, et hoc
ultimum ex auctoritatibus Augustini quae dist. 9
ponuntur, scilicet c. Noli et c. Negare et c. Neque
probatur aperte. Cui etiam concordat Anselmus lib. 1
Cur Deus homo dicens, "Eo pacto quo de peccato quod
omnia quae dico sic volo accipi, videlicet ut, si quid
dixero quod maior non confirmet auctoritas, quamvis
illud ratione probare videar, non alia certitudine
accipiatur, nisi quod interim ita mihi videtur donec
Deus mihi melius aliquo modo revelet." Ex quibus
verbis colligitur quod Anselmus nonnulla tanquam
probabilia solummodo dicere intendebat.

Master They do not think that all the truths treated in
the books of saints are catholic. Hence they say that
the saints handed down some things as catholic, some
things, however, as necessary but not pertaining to
faith, and some things indeed as probable; and this last
is clearly proved from the texts of Augustine which
are included in dist. 9, that is c. Noli [col.17], c.
Negare [col.17] and c. Neque [col.18]. Anselm is in
accord with this in book 1 of Cur deus homo [ch.2]
when he says, "It is on this condition that I want
everything I say to be received, that is, let anything I
say which a greater authority does not confirm not be
received as a certainty, even if I seem to prove it by
reason, but only that it seems this way to me for the
time, until God in some way gives me a better
revelation." We gather from these words that Anselm
was intending to say some things as probable only.

Capitulum 5

Chapter 5

Discipulus Ex his quae narrasti magnam occasionem
cogitandi mihi dedisti de ipsis, tamen plura quaerere
nunc nequaquam nunc intendo. Sed quot generibus
veritatum oporteat christianos catholicos assentire
secundum sententiam praedictorum absque omni
probatione tibi placeat indicare.

Student You have given me a fine opportunity to
think about these things by what you have said, yet I
do not intend to seek to know more now. But would
you please indicate without any proof how many
kinds of truth, according to the opinion of the
aforesaid, it is necessary for catholic christians to
assent to.

According to the second opinion, there are five kinds of truth Catholics must accept

35

