Capitulum 6
Chapter 6
Discipulus: Puto quod fortiores rationes pro opinione Student: I think you have produced rather strong
predicta fecisti, ideo ad assertionem contrariam te arguments for the aforementioned opinion. Apply
converte, et quod nec imperator nec aliquis secularis sit yourself therefore to the contrary assertion, and try to
iudex ordinarius pape nitaris ostendere. Hanc enim show that neither the emperor nor any secular person
assertionem puto consonam veritati.
would be the pope's normal judge, for I believe this
assertion is consonant with the truth.
Magister: Quod nec imperator nec aliquis secularis sit Master: Many attempt to prove by authorities and
iudex ordinarius pape auctoritatibus et rationibus arguments that neither the emperor nor any secular
nonnulli probare nituntur. Est autem prima ratio talis. person would be the pope's normal judge. And this is the
Imperator non est iudex ordinarius illius qui non habet first argument: the emperor is not the normal judge of
superiorem in terris, sed papa non habet superiorem in one who has no superior on earth; but the pope has no
terris ergo etc. Maior probatione non indiget quia iudex superior on earth, therefore etc. The major requires no
est superior illo cuius est iudex. Minor est probata proof because a judge is superior to the person who's
superius per plures auctoritates et rationes.
judge he is. The minor was proved above[1 Dial. 6.1] by
many authorities and arguments.
Discipulus: Prius ostensum est generaliter quod papa Student: Earlier it was declared in general that the pope
non habet iudicem superiorem in terris. Nunc autem has no superior judge on earth. Now however
specialiter proba quod imperator vel aliquis laicus vel demonstrate specifically that the emperor, or some
populus non est iudex ordinarius ipsius.
layman or people, is not the normal judge of the pope.
Magister: Quod specialiter imperator non sit iudex Master: That the emperor specifically would not be the
ordinarius pape ostenditur primo sic. Inferior non est normal judge of the pope is shown first of all in this
iudex ordinarius sui superioris, sed imperator est manner: an inferior is not the normal judge of his
inferior papa et eius iurisdictioni subiectus, ergo etc. superior; but the emperor is inferior to the pope and
Maior est manifesta, unde dicit Nicholaus papa ut subject to his jurisdiction, therefore etc. The major is
habetur di. 21 c. Inferior: "sole clarius exhibuimus non obvious whence Pope Nicholas states (we have it in dis.
posse quemquam qui minoris auctoritatis est eum qui 21 ch. Inferior)[col. 70]: "We have shown with more
maioris est potestatis iudiciis suis addicere aut propriis clarity than the light of the sun that one of lesser
diffinitionibus subiugare". Minor vero sanctorum authority cannot sentence by his judgments or bind by
auctoritatibus comprobatur. Ait enim Gregorius his own definitions someone who is of greater power."
Nazianzenus ut habetur di. 10 c. Suscipitis, scribens The minor on the other hand is confirmed by the
imperatoribus Constantinopolitanis: "suscipitis ne authority of saints. For Gregory of Naziance says,
libertatem verbi libenter accipitis quod lex Christi writing to the Constantinopolitan emperors (we have it
sacerdotali vos subiicit potestati, atque istis tribunalibus in di. 10 c. Suscipitis )[col. 20]: "Do you not
subdit. Dedit enim et nobis potestatem, dedit acknowledge the freedom of the Word ? Accept freely
principatum multo perfectiorem principatibus vestris". that the law of Christ places you under priestly power,
Item Felix papa ut habetur eadem di. c. Certum ait: and subjects you to these tribunals. For he also granted a
"certum est hoc rebus vestris esse salutare ut cum de power to us, granted a rulership far more perfect than
causis agitur Dei iuxta ipsius constitutum regiam your own." Again: Pope Felix states (we have it in the
voluntatem sacerdotibus Christi studeatis subdere non same di. c. Certum )[col. 20]: "When God's causes are
preferre", et infra: "neque eius sanctionibus velle broached it is certainly advantageous to your interests
dominari cuius Deus voluit clementie tue pie devotionis that, in accordance with His command, you strive not to
colla submittere". Hoc idem habetur di. 96 c. Duo sunt make the royal will paramount but to subject it to the
et c. Si imperator. Ex quibus et multis aliis habetur quod priests of Christ", and further down: "nor should there be
imperator est inferior papa.
a wish to override the sanctions of one to whose
clemency God willed to subordinate the neck of your
pious devotion." The same point is made in di. 96 c.
Duo sunt[col. 10] and in c. Si imperator[col. 11]. From
these canons and many others we have it that the
emperor is inferior to the pope.
Quod etiam multis rationibus nonnulli probare nituntur. And some attempt to prove this by numerous arguments
Primo quia qui iurat alii fidelitatem est inferior illo cui [OP II, 687. John of Paris, De potestate regia et papali,
iurat. Imperator prestat iuramentum fidelitatis pape (di. ch. 11]. First: because he who swears fealty to another is
63 Tibi Domino) ergo etc. Secundo quia imperator est inferior to the one he swears to; but the emperor
inferior illo qui habet potestatem transferendi imperium provides an oath of fealty to the pope (di. 63 c. Tibi
de gente in gentem. Hanc potestatem habet papa (Extra domino)[col. 246], therefore etc. Second: because the
De electione Venerabilem) igitur etc. Tertio quia emperor is inferior to one who has the power of
imperator est inferior illo qui potest eum transferring the empire from nation to nation; and this
excommunicationis sententia innodare. Hoc autem papa power the pope possesses (Extra, De electione c.
278

