me spernit". Hoc etiam patet, quia non defendere alium disciples: "he that despiseth you despiseth me". [Luke
est quidam modus specialis alium contempnendi. Qui 10:16] Indeed this is evident, because not to defend
enim non defendit, spernit. Non defendere namque, cum another is a certain specific mode of despising that
quis potest, ex contemptu procedit sicut defendere ex person. For he who does not defend, despises. And not to
amore procedit. Sed omnes catholici debent Christum defend when one can, proceeds from contempt, just as to
defendere quando possunt, testante Augustino, qui defend proceeds from love. But all catholics have the
turbam asserit graviter deliquisse quia Christum cum duty to defend Christ when they can, as Augustine attests
duceretur ad mortem non defendit, qui, ut habetur 23 q. who states that the crowd sinned gravely because it did
3 c. ultimo, ait: "ostendit propheta nec illos immunes a not defend Christ when the latter was being led to his
scelere esse, qui permiserunt principibus Christum death. Here are his words as recorded in 23 q. 3, last
interficere, cum pro multitudine timerentur, et possent chapter: "the prophet demonstrates that they also were
illos a facto, et se a consensu liberare". Ergo etiam illi not exempt from crime who allowed their leaders (who
qui discipulos Christi veritatem catholicam nuntiantes feared for the security of the populace) to kill Christ, and
non defendunt non sunt immunes a scelere reputandi. who might have liberated these leaders from
Tales autem discipuli Christi sunt papam hereticum responsibility for the misdeed, and themselves from
impugnantes qui veritatem profitentur catholicam. Ergo consenting to it". [c. Ostendit col. 898] Therefore they
tales sunt ab omnibus catholicis defendendi.
also who do not defend the disciples of Christ
announcing catholic truth must not be considered as
being exempt from crime. But those who oppose a
heretic pope and profess the catholic truth are such
disciples of Christ. Therefore they must be defended by
all catholics.
Octavo sic. Qui miserie alicuius compatitur subvenit Here is the eighth reason. He who feels compassion
sibi et defendit eum cum potest. Sed sanum membrum towards another's wretchedness comes to his assistance
et verum corporis Christi mistici compatitur alteri and defends him when he can. But a healthy and true
membro in periculo constituto, cum videmus iuxta member of Christ's mystical body feels compassion for
Apostolum quod "si quid patitur unum membrum" another member when the latter is in danger, since we
(corporis naturalis) "compatiuntur omnia membra" (1 see, according to the Apostle, that "whether one
Cor. 12.) Ergo si aliqui patiuntur propter member" of a natural body "suffer, all the members
impugnationem catholice veritatis, omnia membra sana suffer with it" (1 Cor. 12). [1 Corinthians 12:26]
corporis Christi mistici compatiuntur eisdem et per Therefore if some suffer because of an attack on catholic
consequens eis subveniunt et ipsos defendunt si possunt. truth, all healthy members of Christ's mystical body
suffer along with them, and consequently come to their
assistance and defend them if they can.
Nono sic. Opera misericordie sunt omnibus Here is the ninth reason. Works of mercy must be
impendenda. Ergo et defensio cum sit opus misericordie afforded to all people. Therefore defense also, since it is
est omnibus impendenda, et per consequens defensio a work of mercy, must be afforded to everyone, and
impugnantibus papam hereticum est prestanda.
consequently defense must be made available to the
opponents of a heretic pope.
Capitulum 38
Chapter 38
Discipulus: Per istam rationem probaretur quod Student: One might prove by this reason that opponents
impugnantes catholicam veritatem essent a catholicis of catholic truth must be defended, because it is
defendendi quia opera misericordie non solum bonis sed appropriate for catholics to extend works of mercy not
etiam malis oportet catholicos exhibere.
only to the good but also to the bad.
Cum ergo defensio sit opus misericordie oportet Therefore since defense is a work of mercy, it is proper
catholicos defensare hereticos veritatem catholicam for catholics to defend heretics who oppose catholic
impugnantes. Item, opera misericordie nequaquam truth. Again, works of mercy are in no way obligatory
cadunt sub precepto, tunc enim qui non daret for in that case he who did not give alms or did not
eleemosynam aut non redimeret captivos peccaret redeem captives would sin mortally. Therefore if defense
mortaliter. Si ergo defensio est opus misericordie is a work of compassion, catholics are not bound to such
catholici ad talem defensionem de necessitate salutis defense by necessity of salvation.
minime astringuuntur.
Amplius, sicut punire delinquentes pertinet solummodo More, just as the punishment of delinquents pertains
ad iudices seculares vel ecclesiasticos, ita defendere solely to secular or ecclesiastical judges, so is the
bonos ad superiores et potestates publicas noscitur defense of law-abiding people known to be the preserve
pertinere. Ergo non ad omnes catholicos pertinet of political superiors and of public authorities. Therefore
defensare impugnantes papam hereticum.
it is not the business of all catholics to defend opponents
of a heretic pope.
Rursus, oppressorum defensio exhibetur cum illate vel Further, a defense of the oppressed is displayed when
331

