christianis publice impugnare. Sicut enim omnibus licet opposing an unjust sentence. But it is permitted to the
publice confiteri Christum, ipso dicente Matth. 10 one against whom such a sentence is rendered, as well as
"omnis ergo qui confitebitur me coram hominibus to other Christians, to publicly oppose the sentence of a
confitebor et ego eum coram patre meo qui est in celis", pope who proclaims that the Christian law is false and
sic licet omnibus blasphemos Christi impugnare. Papa that Christ was a false prophet. For just as it is permitted
autem pronuntians legem christianam esse falsam et to all to publicly acknowledge Christ (he said himself in
Christum fuisse falsum prophetam est blasphemus Matthew 10(:32-33) "whosoever therefore shall confess
Christi. Ergo licet cuilibet ipsum impugnare et per me before men, him will I confess also before my father
consequens licet ab ipso appellare. Nono sic. Ab illo which is in heaven"), so is it permitted to all to oppose
appellare licet si in causa fidei se pro iudice gesserit qui the blasphemers of Christ. But the pope who proclaims
in causa fidei iudex esse non debet. Sed papa diffinitive that the Christian law is false and that Christ was a false
pronuntians Christum fuisse falsum prophetam nullam prophet is a blasphemer of Christ. Therefore it is
debet exercere potestatem in christianos, ergo ab eo licet permitted to anyone to oppose this pope, and
appellare. Maior videtur certa. Minor probatur, quia consequently it is permitted to appeal from him. Here is
nullus blasphemus Christi debet exercere potestatem in the ninth reason. It is permitted to appeal from someone
christianos, teste Innocentio tertio qui in concilio (if he were to function as a judge in a case of faith) who
generali, ut habetur Extra, de Iudeis, Cum sit, ait: "cum must not be a judge in such a case. But a pope who
sit nimis absurdum ut blasphemus Christi in christianos definitively proclaims that Christ was a false prophet
vim potestatis exerceat etc." Sed papa diffinitive must exercise no authority over Christians, therefore one
pronuntians Christum falsum fuisse prophetam est may appeal from him. The major premiss seems certain.
blasphemus Christi, ergo in christianos vim potestatis The minor is proved as follows. No blasphemer of Christ
exercere non debet.
must exercise power over Christians, witness Innocent
III who states in a general council (we have this in Extra,
De Iudeis, Cum sit) [col. 777]: "since it is exceedingly
absurd that a blasphemer of Christ should exercise power
of authority over Christians, etc." But a pope definitively
proclaiming that Christ was a false prophet is a
blasphemer of Christ, therefore he must not exercise the
power of authority over Christians.
Discipulus: Ista ratio non videtur concludere quia Student: This reason does not seem conclusive, because
Innocentius in illo capitulo loquitur de iudeis. Papa in the cited chapter Innocent is referring to Jews. But the
autem licet pronuntiaret Christum falsum fuisse pope, even if he were to proclaim that Christ was a false
prophetam non esset propter hoc iudeus. Ergo per prophet, would not on that account be a Jew. Therefore it
dictum capitulum non potest probari quod non possit in cannot be demonstrated by the cited chapter that such a
christianos vim potestatis exercere quamdiu ab ecclesia pope would not be entitled to exercise the power of
toleratur.
authority over Christians so long as the church tolerated
him.
Magister: Hec tua responsio per hoc excluditur quod Master: This response of yours is excluded by the
licet Innocentius loquatur in illo capitulo de iudeis, following consideration. Although Innocent does speak
statuens quod eis officia publica nullatenus of Jews in that chapter and decrees that public offices
commitantur, statuti tamen sui rationem assignans should in no wise be committed to them, he nevertheless
asserit manifeste quod nullus blasphemus Christi debet assigns a reason to his statute when he clearly asserts
in christianos vim potestatis exercere, et quod ideo that no blasphemer of Christ must exercise the power of
iudeis non sunt officia publica committenda. Ubi autem authority over Christians, this being therefore the motive
est eadem ratio debet esse idem ius. Cum ergo papa for denying the granting of public offices to Jews. But
diffinitive pronuntians Christum falsum fuisse where the reason is the same the law must be the same.
prophetam sit manifeste blasphemus Christi, sequitur Therefore since a pope who definitively proclaims that
evidenter quod sicut iudei propter hoc quod sunt Christ was a false prophet is an obvious blasphemer of
blasphemi Christi non debent in christianos vim Christ, it follows evidently that, just as Jews must not
potestatis exercere ita papa diffinitive pronuntians exercise the power of authority over Christians because
Christum falsum fuisse prophetam propter hoc quod est they are blasphemers of Christ, for the same reason a
blasphemus Christi non debet in christianos vim pope who definitively proclaims that Christ was a false
potestatis exercere. Decimo sic. Ab illo pro causa prophet must not exercise the power of authority over
heresis licite appellatur si se gerit pro iudice et iniquam Christians because he is a blasphemer of Christ. Here is
contra fidem profert sententiam, ad quem in causa fidei the tenth reason. One appeals legitimately for cause of
non licet provocare, quia ad illum se gerentem pro heresy from someone (if he functions as a judge and
iudice licite provocatur a quo appellare non licet, sicut renders an unjust sentence against the faith) to whom it
ad imperatorem pro temporalibus licite provocatur quia is not permitted to appeal in a case of faith, because one
ab illo appellare non licet. Sed ad papam diffinitive may legitimately appeal to someone who functions as a
305

