tepiditate semota, ad pacem firmiter tenendam mutuum command that bishops, focusing on God alone and on
sibi consilium et auxilium prebeant, neque hoc alicuius the salvation of the people, putting aside all lack of
amore vel odio pretermittant. Quod si quis in hoc Dei enthusiasm, should provide to each other mutual counsel
opere tepidus fuerit inventus, dampnum proprie and assistance for the firm maintenance of peace, nor
dignitatis incurrat". Cui etiam concordat Alexander forego this for the love or hate of another. Should
papa, qui, ut legitur 3 q. 1 c. Nulli, ait: "qui autem ex someone be found to be lukewarm in this work of God,
vestro fuerit collegio, et ab auxilio vestro se subtraxerit, he will incur the loss of his own office". [col. 315] Pope
magis schismaticus quam sacerdos esse probabitur. Alexander also agrees with this, and states, as we read
'Ecce' (inquit propheta), 'quam bonum et quam [col. 506] in 3 q. 1 c. Nulli: "but he who is of your
iucundum habitare fratres in unum'. Illi vero non society yet withdraws from your assistance, will be
habitant in unum, qui fratrum se solatio subtrahunt". Ex demonstrably more schismatic than priest. The prophet
quibus verbis datur intelligi quod episcopi et sacerdotes says 'behold, how good and how pleasant it is for
quorum etiam unus alteri minime est subiectus, brethren to dwell together in unity'. [Psalms 132:1] But
auxilium mutuum sibi debent impendere, et per they do not dwell together in unity who withdraw
consequens sibi debent defensionem mutuam themselves from the consolation of brethren". These
congruentem prestare. Ex quo sequitur quod socius words make us understand that bishops and priests, even
socium debet defendere.
those among them who are not subject to another, must
provide each other with mutual assistance, and
consequently must provide each other with the
appropriate mutual defense. From which it follows that a
partner must defend a partner.
Secunda ratio est talis. Magis tenetur socius socium sibi The second reason is this. A partner is more obligated to
non inferiorem patientem iniuste defendere quam viri defend a partner suffering unjustly who is not his
ecclesiastici teneantur defendere sceleratos qui eis inferior, than ecclesiastical persons are obligated to
minime sunt subiecti. Sed viri ecclesiastici sceleratos et defend miscreants who are not subject to them. But
impios ad ecclesiam fugientes, licet eis nullatenus sint ecclesiastical persons are bound to defend the wicked
subiecti, defendere tenentur. Ergo multo magis socius and impious that flee to the church for safety, even
socium innocentem debet defendere. Minor probatur though they are in no way their subjects. Therefore all
auctoritate Gregorii qui, ut habetur 23 q. 5 c. Reos, ait: the more must a partner defend an innocent partner. The
"reos sanguinis defendat ecclesia", ubi dicit glossa: minor premiss is proved by the authority of Gregory who
"omnes fugientes ad ecclesiam tenetur defendere ut 17 states, as is recorded in 23 q. 5 c. Reos: "the church
q. 4 Reum et hoc verum est sive rei sint sive non".
defends those guilty of shedding blood", [col. 932]
where the gloss [cols, 1338-9] explains: "it is obligated
to defend all those who flee to the church for safety, as
in 17 q. 4 Reum, [col. 817] and this is true whether they
are guilty or not".
Discipulus: Hoc dicit Gregorius quia viri ecclesiastici Student: Gregory says this because ecclesiastical
ecclesiam tenentur defendere, et ideo tenentur prohibere persons are obligated to defend the church, and therefore
ne fugientibus ad ecclesiam violentia fiat.
they are obligated to prevent violence being done to
those who flee to the interior of a church.
Magister: Tu aliam causam assignas quam Gregorius Master: You assign a different reason than does
quare rei sunt ab ecclesia defendendi, nam Gregorius Gregory as to why the guilty must be defended by the
causam assignans sui dicti immediate post verba church. Indeed Gregory explains his statement by
predicta subiungit: "ne effusionis sanguinis fiat immediately adding this comment to the words just
particeps", ex quibus verbis colligitur quod ideo viri cited: "so that it not be a participant in the shedding of
ecclesiastici debent defendere reos ad ecclesiam blood". [col. 932] One gathers from these words that the
fugientes ne homicidii fiant participes. Quia qui non reason why ecclesiastical persons must defend criminals
resistit cum potest, consentit, iuxta sanctorum patrum who flee to the church for safety is so as not to
sententias. Ergo consimiliter qui non defendit socium participate in a homicide. For he who does not resist
iniuriam patientem, cum possit, iniurie crimen incurrit. when he can is a consenting party according to the
rulings of the holy fathers. Similarly therefore, he who
does not when he can defend a partner suffering an
injury commits the same crime.
Unde ex hoc tertia ratio sic formatur. Quilibet catholicus And on this basis one may construct a third reason as
ad hoc tenetur sine quo etiam in crimine participat follows. Every catholic is bound to what he must do so
criminoso. Sed qui non defendit, cum potest, socium as not to be a party to some criminal's misdeed. But he
iniuriam patientem participat in crimine iniuriam who does not when he can defend a partner suffering an
inferenti. Ergo socius socium, cum potest, tenetur injury, participates in the crime of the individual who
defendere. Maior est manifesta. Minor auctoritatibus causes the injury. Therefore a partner is obligated to
340

