reprobare, licet paucas. Ad theologiam autem spectat though few. It pertains to theology, however, to approve
omnes veritates catholicas approbare et omnes hereses all catholic truths and to disapprove of all heresies.
reprobare. Quare, licet principaliter tales approbatio et Therefore although such approval and disapproval
reprobatio ad theologiam pertineant, pertinent tamen pertain chiefly to theology, they do nevertheless pertain
nihilominus secundario ad scientiam canonistarum.
secondarily to the science of the canonists.
Aliam autem rationem adducunt dicentes quod theologia They bring forward another argument too, saying that in
veritates catholicas approbando et hereses reprobando a approving catholic truths and in disapproving of heresies
canonistarum scientia nichil omnino recipit vel theology receives or borrows nothing at all from the
mendicat, canonistarum autem scientia veritates science of the canonists. The science of the canonists,
catholicas approbando et hereses reprobando a theologia however, proceeds in the approving of catholic truths
omnia mendicando procedit. Quare hec ad theologiam and the disapproving of heresies by borrowing
principaliter et universaliter , ad canonistarum vero everything from theology. Therefore these activities are
scientiam secundario quodammodo et particulariter known to pertain chiefly and universally to theology but
pertinere noscuntur .
to the science of the canonists secondarily, to a certain
extent and only in particular cases.
Capitulum 4
Chapter 4
Discipulus: HAEC RESPONSIO michi videtur Student: THIS REPLY seems likely to me. Therefore
probabilis. Quare rationem secundam pertracta.
investigate the second argument.
Magister:: Ad secundam rationem respondetur quod, Master: The reply to the second argument is that in
quantum ad ea que fidei sunt, magis credendum est respect of matters of faith theology is more deserving of
theologie quam cuicunque alii scientie, nullisque belief than any other science and that it is not
scriptoribus quarumcunque scientiarum ita oportet appropriate to believe any of the writers of any sciences
credere sicut scriptoribus sacre theologie. Auctoritas like the writers of sacred theology. As to the text of
vero beati Augustini, que adducitur, ut nonnulli dicunt, blessed Augustine, which, they say, is adduced
frequenter a multis contra intellectum beati Augustini, frequently, it is brought forward by many people very
pessime allegatur.
wrongly against blessed Augustine's meaning .
Ad cuius intellectum dicunt esse sciendum quod nomen To understand this they say that it should be known that
ecclesie equivoce in locis variis scripturarum accipitur: the word "church" is taken ambiguously in different
aliquando enim accipitur pro loco corporali divinis written works. For sometimes it is taken for the physical
officiis deputato, aliquando pro aliquo speciali collegio place set aside for the divine services, sometimes for
clericorum, aliquando pro toto collegio omnium some particular body of clerics, sometimes for the whole
clericorum, aliquando pro aliqua multitudine speciali body of all clerics, sometimes for some particular
cleri et populi , aliquando pro tota congregatione gathering of the clergy and people , sometimes for the
fidelium simul in hac vita mortali degentium; aliquando whole gathering of believers living together in this
vero nomen ecclesie non solum totam congregationem mortal life, and sometimes the word "church" includes
catholicorum viventium sed etiam fideles mortuos not only the whole gathering of catholics who are alive
comprehendit.
but also those believers who are dead.
Et isto ultimo modo accipit ecclesiam beatus Augustinus It is in this last way that blessed Augustine takes
in libro contra Manicheos, et recitatur 11 dist. c. Palam, "church" in his book against the Manichees which is
qui ait, "Palam est quod in re dubia ad fidem et reported in dist. 11, c. Palam [col.25]. He says, "It is
certitudinem valeat catholice ecclesie auctoritas, que ab well known that in a doubtful matter the authority of the
ipsis fundatissimis sedibus apostolorum usque ad catholic Church prevails for faith and certainty; from
hodiernum diem succedentium sibimet episcoporum those first founded sees of the apostles right up till today
serie et tot populorum consensione firmatur ", ubi it remains strong through the series of bishops
"ecclesia catholica" episcopos et populos a tempore succeeding each other and through the agreement of so
apostolorum usque ad hodiernum diem sibimet many peoples." Here "the catholic church" refers to the
succedentes importat. Et sic accipit nomen ecclesie bishops and peoples succeeding each other from the
Augustinus cum asserit quod non crederet evangelio nisi time of the apostles right up till today. And in this way
eum ecclesie auctoritas compelleret. Ista enim ecclesia Augustine takes the word "church" when he asserts that
scriptores evangelii et omnes apostolos comprehendit, he would not believe the gospel if the authority of the
sicut probatum est. Quare ex auctoritate Augustini sane church did not force him to. For, as has been proved,
intellecta inferri non potest quod magis sit credendum "church" in that sense includes the writers of the gospel
romano pontifici, canonum conditori, quam evangelio, and all the apostles. It can not be inferred on the basis of
et per consequens per eam probari non potest quod the text of Augustine properly interpreted, therefore, that
maior fides exhibenda sit sacris canonibus quam sancto the Roman pontiff, the maker of the canons, should be
evangelio. Concedunt tamen quod magis credendum est believed more than the gospel. And consequently it can
ecclesie que est multitudo catholicorum omnium qui not be proved by it that greater trust should be shown in
fuerunt a temporibus prophetarum et apostolorum usque the sacred canons than in the holy gospel. Nevertheless
modo quam evangelio, non quia de evangelio sit they grant that the church which is the multitude of all
8

