si quis voluerit vocare appellationem omnem uttering of the word itself. But if someone would want to
impugnationem pape heretici, sic dicunt quod necesse designate as an appeal every opposition to a heretic
est appellare. Si autem dicat quis quod non sit utendum pope, then they say that an appeal is necessary. And if
appellatione in isto sensu, de verbis contendere nolunt, someone objects that the term "appeal" must not be used
et ideo in hoc sistunt quod papa predicans heresim modo in this sense, these theorists refuse to enter into a dispute
predicto est a catholicis impugnandus.
about words, and for that reason firmly maintain that a
pope who preaches heresy in the aforesaid manner must
be opposed by catholics.

Capitulum 36
Chapter 36
Discipulus: Ex premissis intelligo quod dicentium Student: I understand from the preceding material that
licere catholicos appellare a papa heretico dicunt of those who affirm that catholics are allowed to appeal
quidam quod non est necesse verbum 'appellandi' from a heretic pope, some say that it is not necessary to
emittere, licet aliquando expediat, quidam vero dicunt utter the word "appeal" though it might sometimes be
quod hoc est necesse. Primi autem diversas patiuntur useful, while others claim that the utterance is necessary.
difficultates vocales propter varias significationes quas And the former are involved in various terminological
nomini 'appellationis' attribuunt. Omnes autem predicti difficulties because of the distinct senses which they
in hoc conveniunt quod omnem doctrinam pape attribute to the word "appeal". All of the aforementioned
hereticam et etiam papam hereticum licet fidelibus individuals, however, do agree on one point: that
impugnare. Ideo omisso vocabulo 'appellationis' et believers have the right to oppose every heretical
'appellantis' volo in quibusdam interrogationibus quas doctrine of the pope, and even the heretic pope himself.
tibi de materia precedenti proponam uti vocabulo Therefore, putting aside the terms "appeal" and
'impugnationis' et 'impugnantium'. In primis autem "appellant", I would like to use the terms "opposition"
interrogo an impugnantes papam hereticum sint a and "opponent" in the context of certain questions I shall
catholicis aliis defendendi etiam contra papam taliter be putting to you with respect to the preceding issue.
impugnantes punire volentem.
And first of all I ask whether opponents of a heretic pope
are to be defended by other catholics even against a pope
wanting to punish such opponents.
Magister: Circa hanc interrogationem sunt assertiones Master: There are contrary assertions in reply to this
contrarie. Una est quod impugnantes papam hereticum question. One is that the opponents of a heretic pope
qui verbum 'appellandi' nequaquam emittunt non sunt a who by no means utter the word "appeal" must not be
catholicis defendendi. Alia est contraria scilicet quod defended by catholics. There is a contrary view, namely
sunt a catholicis defendendi.
that such opponents must be defended.
Discipulus: Pro istis assertionibus contrariis te libenter Student: I am gladly all ears as to your arguments in
audio allegare.
support of these contrary assertions.
Magister: Prima assertio videtur posse probari tali Master: It appears that the first assertion may be proved
ratione. Maius est defendere impugnantes papam by the following reason. It is a greater matter to defend
hereticum quam eorum impugnationi deferre, the opponents of a heretic pope than to defer to their
quemadmodum maius est defendere appellantes quam opposition, just as it is a greater matter to defend
appellationi deferre. Sed catholici non tenentur deferre appellants than to defer to their appeal. But catholics are
impugnationi pape heretici nisi impugnantes not bound to defer to an opposition against a heretic
interposuerint appellationem legitimam. Ergo nec pope unless these opponents have issued a legitimate
tenentur taliter impugnantes defendere. Secundo sic. Per appeal. Therefore neither are they bound to defend such
impugnationem non eximitur impugnans a iurisdictione opponents. Here is a second reason. His opposition does
prelati quem impugnat sed per appellationem legitimam not exempt an opponent from the jurisdiction of the
eximitur appellans a iurisdictione prelati a quo appellat. prelate he is opposing, but a legitimate appeal does
Ergo per solam impugnationem pape heretici non exempt an appellant from the jurisdiction of the prelate
eximitur impugnans a iurisdictione pape, sed per from whom he is appealing. Therefore a mere opposition
appellationem eximitur. Catholici autem non debent to a heretic pope does not exempt the appellant from the
defendere contra papam nisi solos exemptos a pope's jurisdiction, but an appeal does create such an
iurisdictione pape. Ergo licet teneantur defendere exemption. And catholics must not provide a defense
appellantes non tamen tenentur defendere impugnantes against the pope except and only to those individuals
qui non appellant.
who are exempt from the pope's jurisdiction. Therefore
although catholics are obligated to defend appellants,
they are not for all that obligated to defend opponents
who do not appeal.
Capitulum 37
Chapter 37
Discipulus: Sufficiant iste allegationes pro assertione Student: These are sufficient arguments in support of
328

