Capitulum 5
Chapter 5
Discipulus: AD ISTAM secundam rationem michi Student: IT SEEMS TO ME that you have reported a
videtur quod responsionem rationabilem recitasti. Nunc reasonable reply to the second argument. And now I ask
autem referas michi queso quomodo ad rationem tertiam that you relate to me how reply is made to the third
respondetur.
argument.
Magister:: Ad rationem tertiam respondent nonulli Master: Some people reply to the third argument by
dicentes quod summus pontifex debet sacrarum saying that the highest pontiff ought to have knowledge
literarum habere notitiam et etiam in sacris canonibus of sacred letters, and also ought to be learned in the
debet esse peritus, et ideo symbolum ordinare et sacred canons. And therefore it pertains to him
articulos fidei recte distinguere spectat ad ipsum especially, with the advice and agreement of a general
precipue, cum consilio et consensu concilii generalis. council, to appoint a creed and rightly to distinguish the
Sed in symbolum ordinando et articulos fidei articles of faith. But in appointing a creed and
distinguendo, et eadem ratione in diffiniendo authentice distinguishing the articles of faith, and, by the same
que assertio est catholica et que heretica reputanda, argument, in pronouncing validly what assertion should
theologie principaliter debet inniti; secundario autem in be regarded as catholic and what as heretical, he should
sacris canonibus poterit se fundare. Et ideo ex ista rely chiefly on theology; secondarily, however, he can
ratione concludi potest quod ad theologos spectat base himself on the sacred canons. And it can be
principaliter diffinire docendo, non legem aliis concluded from that argument, therefore, that it pertains
imponendo, que assertio inter catholicas, queve inter chiefly to theologians to decide by teaching, not by
hereticas, debeat numerari.
imposing a law on others, which assertion should be
counted as catholic and which heretical.
Discipulus:: Puto quod quicunque intelligens hec que Student: I think that anyone with understanding who
scripsisti perlegerit tenebit indubie quod ad canonistas reads what you have written will hold it as indubitable
non pertinet de multis assertionibus iudicare an catholice that it does not pertain to canonists to judge of many
vel heretice sint censende, et de quibuscumque assertions whether they should be considered catholic or
assertionibus canoniste discernunt an inter catholicas vel heretical, and that when canonists decide about any
hereticas debeant numerari necesse est eos ad assertions whether they should be counted as catholic or
theologiam recurrere si voluerint ad profunda resolvere, heretical they must have recourse to theology if they
presertim cum nulla assertio vere catholica vel heretica want to resolve [the question] deeply, especially since
sit habenda nisi quia theologie consonat aut repugnat. no assertion should be considered truly catholic or
Quare non arbitror quod aliquis literatus aliqualiter heretical except on the grounds that it agrees with or
opinetur quod ad canonistas qui non sunt theologi conflicts with theology. I do not think, therefore, that
pertineat principaliter diffinitio sepe fata.
any learned person should in any way opine that the oftmentioned decision pertains chiefly to canonists who are
not theologians.
Capitulum 6
Chapter 6
Magister: MULTA NIMIS ignoras. Scio enim quosdam Master: THERE is a lot you do not knowZ I know
canonistas qui theologos deridere presumunt cum some canonists who presume to scoff at theologians
investigare nituntur de multis assertionibus an debeant when they try to investigate about many assertions
inter hereses computari, dicentes quod talis investigatio whether they should be counted among the heresies,
ad canonistas, non ad theologos, noscitur pertinere.
saying that such an investigation is known to pertain to
canonists not to theologians.
Discipulus:: De hoc quod dicis vehementer admiror, Student: I am absolutely astonished at what you say,
quia dictum huiusmodi nullam videtur probabilitatem because such a statement seems to have no probability.
habere. Narra tamen si pro se aliquam rationem Nevertheless tell me if those who assert such a thing
huiusmodi assertores allegant.
bring forward any reason for it.
Magister:: Audivi quod ex hoc moventur tantummodo, Master: I have heard that they are moved only by the
quod theologi, cum ipsi vel alii de heresi accusantur vel fact that when theologians or others are accused of or try
alios accusare conantur, libellos accusationis, to accuse others of heresy they do not know how to
responsionis, appellationis, et huiusmodi componere compose or prepare the writs of accusation, reply,
nesciunt nec formare, sed ad canonistas oportet eos appeal, and the like, but must have recourse to
habere recursum. Quare dicunt quod ad canonistas, non canonists. They say, therefore, that it pertains to
ad theologos, spectat discernere que assertio catholica canonists not to theologians to determine which
vel heretica est censenda.
assertion should be considered catholic, which heretical.
Discipulus:: Ista ratio michi apparet tam frivola quod Student: That argument seems so frivolous to me as not
responsione non indiget. Aliud est enim discernere que to need a reply. For it is one thing to determine which
assertio catholica, queve heretica est putanda, aliud est assertion should be thought of as catholic or which
scire formulas actionum et modum agendi contra heretical, and it is another to know the formulae for law
10

