responsionem autem interrogatio antecedit, tuum erit future work be done by question and answer, and the
incipere. Quod ergo tibi placet interroga .
question precedes its answer, it will be up to you to
begin. So ask what question you please.
LIBER PRIMUS
Book 1
Capitulum 1
Chapter 1
Discipulus: QUONIAM occasione dissensionis quam in Student: SINCE my investigation into very many
Christianitate conspicio de assertionibus hereticalibus et matters is occasioned by the dissension I see among
catholicis ac etiam de personis hereticis et orthodoxis Christians about heretical and catholic assertions, and
sum indagaturus quamplurima , in primis duxi also about heretical and orthodox persons, I have
querendum ad quos, theologos videlicet vel canonistas, considered that it should first be asked to whom does it
pertinet principaliter diffinire que assertio catholica, que chiefly belong, to theologians or to canonists, to define
heretica, est censenda.
which assertion should be considered catholic, which
heretical. [See Scott, "Theologians vs Canonists on
Heresy".]
Is it for canonists, or for theologians, to decide what is heresy?
Magister:: Ad interrogationem propositam respondetur Master: The reply to the question you put forward is
quod verbum diffiniendi plures habet significationes, de that the word "define" has several meanings, two of
quibus due videntur ad propositum pertinere. Contingit which seem relevant to the point at issue. For it is
enim aliquid diffinire auctoritate officii, et sic diffinire possible to define something by the authority of one's
que assertio heretica et que catholica est censenda ad office, and to define in this way which assertion should
summum spectat pontificem et concilium generale. be considered heretical and which catholic pertains to
Aliter contingit diffinire per modum doctrine, quo modo the highest pontiff and a general council. In another
magistri in scholis questiones diffiniunt et determinant. way, it is possible to define by means of teaching, in the
Et sic accepto verbo "diffiniendi" circa propositam way masters in the schools define and determine
questionem diversimode sentiunt literati.
questions. With the word "define" taken in this latter
way, the learned have different opinions about the
question put forward.
Discipulus:: Ad presens accipio verbum "diffiniendi " Student: At present I am taking the word "define" in the
secundo modo. Et sic accepto vocabulo diversas second way. And with the word taken thus, I want to
sententias cum motivis earum audire desidero.
hear the different opinions and the arguments for them.
Magister:: Quorundam est opinio quod ad canonistas Master: It is the opinion of some that it pertains chiefly
principaliter spectat que assertio est catholica, que to canonists to judge which assertion is catholic, which
heretica, iudicare , pro qua tribus rationibus videntur heretical. It seems possible that they are moved to this
posse moveri, quarum prima est hec . Ad illam opinion by three arguments, the first of which is this. To
scientiam principaliter spectat discernere que assertio discern which assertion should be considered catholic,
catholica, que heretica, est censenda que principaliter which heretical, pertains chiefly to that science which
tractat de approbatione veritatum catholicarum et principally treats of the approval of catholic truths and
reprobatione heresum dampnatarum. Huiusmodi est the disapproval of condemned heresies. This is the
scientia canonistarum et non theologia. Ergo etc.
science of the canonists and not theology. Therefore,
etc.
Secunda ratio est hec. Ad illam scientiam pertinet The second argument is this. To define which assertion
diffinire que assertio catholica, que heretica, est should be considered catholic, which heretical, pertains
censenda cui fides quantum ad credibilia principalius to the science to which trust in matters of belief is more
adhibetur. Sed quantum ad ea que sunt fidei magis chiefly given. But with respect to matters of faith the
credendum est canonistarum scientie quam theologie , science of the canonists should be believed more than
quia magis credendum est ecclesie, per quam edita est theology, because the Church, through which the
canonistarum scientia, quam evangelio, teste science of the canonists is produced, should be believed
Augustino , qui videtur asserere maiorem esse more than the gospel, as Augustine attests , who seems
auctoritatem ecclesie quam evangelii, quia nec to assert that the authority of the Church is greater than
evangelio inquit crederem nisi auctoritas ecclesie that of the gospel, since he says, "I would not believe
compulisset. Ergo ad scientiam canonistarum magis the gospel unless the authority of the Church had
pertinet diffinire que assertio catholica, que heretica, est compelled it." To define which assertion should be
censenda quam ad theologiam.
considered catholic and which heretical, therefore,
pertains more to the science of the canonists than to
theology.
Tertia ratio est hec. Ad illam scientiam principaliter The third argument is this. To determine which assertion
spectat discernere que assertio catholica, que heretica, should be considered catholic, which heretical, pertains
est censenda cuius auctor habet symbolum fidei ordinare chiefly to the science whose author has the task of
3

