habent inquirere.
and so it is not their business to inquire about the pope.
Magister: Respondetur tibi quod quilibet prelatus debet Master: The answer to your point is that every prelate
inquirere de omnibus qui gregem suum invadunt, sive must inquire about all those who assault his flock
sint subditi sive non, saltem ad resistendum eisdem, whether they are his subjects or not, at least for the
quemadmodum rex debet omnes repellere qui regnum purpose of resisting them. By the same token a king
suum invadunt quantumcunque sint de alio regno, et must repel all those who attack his kingdom (even if
quilibet etiam nullam habens iurisdictionem debet pro they are from another kingdom), and anyone (even
patria omnes invadentes pro posse repellere quamvis someone possessing no jurisdiction) must for the sake of
nullam super eis iurisdictionem obtineat. Et ex hoc the homeland resist all invaders as much as he can, even
quarta ratio sic formatur. Non minus sollicite debent though he has no jurisdiction over them. And from this
prelati catholici gregem suum contra spirituales there develops a fourth argument. Catholic prelates must
inimicos defendere et ea que ad defensionem pertinent defend their flock against spiritual enemies, and perform
exercere quam reges et principes et eorum subditi all things relevant to such defense with a care no less
debent regna sua et principatus ac patriam contra hostes anxious than that which is incumbent upon kings,
suos defendere ac tueri. Sed reges et principes et subditi princes and their subjects, who must defend and protect
eorum debent terras suas contra invadentes iniuste their kingdoms, princedoms and countries against their
defendere, licet de eorum iurisdictione nequaquam enemies. But kings, princes and subjects must defend
existant. Ergo multo animosius debent prelati contra their lands from unjust invaders even if the latter are not
inimicos spirituales greges suos defendere et ea facere under their jurisdiction. Therefore much more
que ad defensionem spiritualem spectare noscuntur. Sed vigorously must prelates defend their flocks against
ad defensionem noscitur pertinere investigare sollicite spiritual enemies and perform those activities which are
qui sunt isti hostes spirituales qui gregem nituntur known to be relevant to spiritual defense. But to
invadere, maxime si est publica fama per viros honestos investigate with anxious care the identity of the
et providos suscitata quod aliqui volunt dominicum spiritually hostile forces which are attempting to
gregem invadere. Si ergo papa per viros providos et penetrate the flock is known to have defensive
honestos de heresi publice diffamatur catholici debent relevance, above all if a public rumour has been created
diligenter inquirere veritatem.
by honourable and provident men that certain
individuals want to attack the Lord's flock. Therefore if
the pope is publicly defamed of heresy by provident and
honourable men, catholics must diligently inquire into
the truth.
Quinta ratio talis est. Cui periculosum est renuntiare iuri The fifth argument is as follows. One who courts danger
suo , ei periculosum est non inquirere ad quos when renouncing his right is also in danger if he does
extenduntur iura sua quando dubitatur de aliquibus an not inquire to whom his rights extend when there is
extendantur ad ipsos. Sed prelatis catholicis est doubt as to whether some persons are included within
periculosum renuntiare aut cedere iuri suo quod in causa the purview of these rights. But it is dangerous for
Dei susceperunt a Deo teste beato Cypriano qui ut catholic prelates to renounce or to abandon the right
recitatur 7 q. 1 c. Quam periculosum ait: "quam which they received from God to advance His cause, as
periculosum sit in divinis rebus ut quis cedat iuri suo et witnesses blessed Cyprian who states (this is recited in 7
potestati scriptura sancta declarat cum Esau primatus q. 1 c. Quam periculosum)[col. 569]: "how dangerous it
suos inde perdidit, nec recipere postmodum potuit quod is in matters divine for someone to renounce his right
semel cessit". Ergo periculosum est prelatis catholicis and power holy scripture declares. For Esau thereby lost
non querere sollicite ad quos extenduntur iura eorum in his primacy, nor could he afterwards regain what he had
causis Dei, quando de aliquibus dubitatur an sint once abandoned". Therefore it is dangerous for catholic
potestati catholicorum subiecti. Si autem papa publice prelates not to inquire with anxious care to whom their
per viros providos et honestos de heresi diffamatur rights extend in the affairs of God, when there is doubt
probabiliter dubitandum est an sit potestati catholicorum whether some persons are subject to the power of
subiectus. Ergo de hoc in hoc casu debent catholici catholics. But if the pope is publicly defamed of heresy
diligenter inquirere veritatem, et ita habent de papa by provident and honourable men, doubt must arise as to
taliter diffamato inquisitionem facere diligentem.
whether he is subject to the power of catholics.
Therefore under such conditions catholics have the duty
to inquire attentively about the truth of the matter, and
hence they must proceed to a scrupulous inquisition
about a pope defamed in this manner.

Capitulum 16
Chapter 16
Discipulus: Audivi rationes quibus ostenditur quod Student: I have heard the reasons by which one shows
catholici potestatem habent inquirendi de papa super that catholics have power to inquire about a pope
295

