corporale preparante, non omnes idem habent officium, itself for physical combat not all perform the identical
nec omnes corporaliter preliantur (clerici enim quamvis task, nor are all involved in physical combat (for clerks,
preliari non debeant possunt tamen iusto prelio although they must not actually slash and cut, may
interesse ut hortentur et consulant quod expedit ad nevertheless participate in a just war to encourage others
salutem; multi etiam servitores bellatorum ad and to advise what is expedient for security; and many
preliandum minime sunt apti), nec etiam omnes attendants of the active fighters are hardly fit for physical
bellatores eodem modo hostes impugnant (equites enim combat themselves), nor even do all active fighters attack
et pedites diversimode hostes invadunt), sic in exercitu enemies in the same way (for horsemen and footmen
catholicorum contra papam hereticum non omnes idem attack enemies differently), so by analogy not all have
habent officium. Quidam namque ignorant doctrinam the same task to perform in the army of Catholics
pape erroneam per sacras scripturas efficaciter opposing a heretic pope. Some indeed are incapable of
impugnare, et ideo ad eos non pertinet ipsam effectively attacking the pope's false doctrine by relying
predicando vel docendo per scripturarum testimonia on Holy Writ, and therefore to such does not belong the
reprobare. Alii vero officium predicandi et docendi task of rejecting this doctrine by preaching or teaching
veritatem catholicam et expugnandi pravitatem on the basis of Biblical evidence. Others however have
hereticam susceperunt, et ideo ad illos tanquam ad formally taken up the office of preaching and teaching
precipuos bellatores spectat doctrinam pape erroneam catholic truth, and of destroying heretical wickedness,
fortius expugnare. Quare ex hoc ipso quod omnibus and therefore to such as to the paramount fighters they
orthodoxis indicitur bellum contra papam hereticum, are pertains the task of destroying the pope's false
predicatoribus et doctoribus specialiter iniungi doctrine with greater impact. Hence by the very fact that
dinoscitur ut, suum officium exercentes, predicando et war against a heretic pope is urged upon all true
docendo contra papam hereticum et doctrinam eius believers, preachers and doctors are known to receive a
insurgant. Alii vero qui scripturas ignorant, bellatores special injunction that they must aggressively exercise
spirituales corporaliter defensare, nutrire et sustinere ac their office by preaching and teaching against a heretic
etiam eis favere in omnibus que ad eorum spectant pope and his doctrine. While others, who are ignorant of
officium contra papam hereticum astringuuntur.
scripture, are obligated to physically defend, nourish, and
sustain the spiritual fighters, as well as to favour them in
all matters relevant to their official activity against a
heretic pope.
Discipulus: Aliter confirmatur predicta obiectio, quia Student: My stated objection can be confirmed
in omnibus auctoritatibus preallegatis de papa heretico otherwise, since in all the authorities previously
nulla fit mentio. Si ergo per auctoritates ostenditur quod advanced no mention is made of a heretic pope.
predicatores et doctores debent doctrinam pape Therefore if these authorities show that preachers and
erroneam reprobare, eadem ratione debent doctrinam doctors must reject the pope's false doctrine, by the same
erroneam cuiuscunque heretici impugnare, ad quod token they must attack the false doctrine of any heretic.
tamen minime sunt astricti, quia nullus predicator aut But they are hardly bound to do this, because no preacher
doctor posset omnes doctrinas erroneas hereticorum or doctor can possibly root out all the false doctrines of
extirpare.
heretics.
Magister: Respondetur quod quamvis in auctoritatibus Master: The answer is that even though there is no
allegatis mentio verbalis non fiat de papa heretico, et verbal mention of a heretic pope in the argued
ideo de omnibus hereticis, imo de omnibus malis, authorities, and therefore they must be understood of all
debent intelligi, principaliter tamen debent intelligi de heretics, and indeed of all wicked individuals, they must
papa heretico pro eo quod ipse esset magis nocivus nevertheless be primarily applied to a heretic pope,
quam alii heretici minoris potentie et minorem because he would be more harmful than other heretics of
sequelam habentes. Si enim contra malos et seductores lesser power who possessed a smaller contingent of
oportet bellum spirituale assumere, contra magis malos followers. For if it is proper to wage spiritual war against
et qui levius ac citius possunt decipere orthodoxos est such as are wicked and deceitful, then one must resist
fortius resistendum. Quare cum papa hereticus valeat more strongly against those who are wicked to a higher
plures facilius et citius seducere quam alii heretici degree, and who can more easily and expeditiously
minores, contra ipsum virilissime spiritualiter est deceive the true believers. Therefore since a heretic pope
pugnandum.
has the power to deceive many people with greater ease
and alacrity than other less significant heretics, he must
be spiritually attacked with the utmost vigour.
Capitulum 44
Chapter 44
Discipulus: In responsione mea ad rationem Student: You have said that in my response to the
principalem dixisti innui tria que quibusdam falsa principal argument I proposed three points, which
videntur. Tractasti autem de primo illorum, nunc appeared false to some, and in fact you have dealt with
dissere de secundo.
the first of these. Now discuss the second.
Magister: Secundum quod tua responsio videbatur Master: The second point which your response seemed
432

