Tertio sic. Unusquisque catholicus magis tenetur Therefore everyone is permitted to appeal from such a
defendere fidem catholicam quam filios, consanguineos, sentence. The third reason is this. Every single catholic
vel parentes, quia fides est illis omnibus preferenda. has a greater obligation to defend the catholic faith than
Ergo non minus licet appellare seu provocare pro fide to defend his sons, his blood relatives, or his parents,
catholica condempnata quam pro parente, filio, vel because the faith must be preferred to all these persons.
consanguineo condempnato. Sed mater licet non posset It is therefore no lesser matter to appeal or to issue a
agere pro filio, pro filio tamen condempnato appellare court challenge in support of the condemned catholic
licet, 2 q. 6 c. Non solent, ubi sic dicitur: "sed etsi mater faith than to do this in support of a condemned parent,
ex pietate provocaverit dicendum est et hanc audiri son, or blood relative. But a mother, even if she is not
debet", ubi dicit glossa super verbo "provocaverit": "pro allowed to represent her son in court, is nevertheless
filio condempnato vel pro consanguineo etiam possunt permitted to appeal in support of her condemned son.
appellare aliqui". Igitur multo magis pro fide catholica Here is the relevant statement from 2 q. 6 c. Non solent:
condempnata licet cuilibet catholico appellare seu "but should a mother appeal out of loving concern, let it
provocare. Quarto sic. Non minus licet appellare a be said that she must be heard". [col. 477] Here is the
sententia inferente iniuriam, que est a catholicis maxime gloss's comment in that context on the word "appeal":
vindicanda, quam a sententia inferente iniuriam que "some persons may appeal in support of a condemned
minus est a catholicis vindicanda, quia appellatio vel est son as well as in support of a blood relative". [col. 671]
vindicta quedam vel via quedam ad vindictam Therefore all the more is it permitted to every catholic to
inferendam. Sed iniuria illata per sententiam iniquam appeal or to issue a court challenge in support of the
pape diffinitive pronuntiantis legem christianam esse condemned catholic faith. Here is the fourth reason. The
falsam est magis vindicanda a catholicis quam right to appeal from a harmful sentence which catholics
quecunque iniuria propria alicuius illata per sententiam must punish to the highest degree is not less important
iudicis inferioris. Ergo si licet appellare a sententia than the right to appeal from a harmful sentence that
iudicis inferioris iniqua qua sententiaretur aliquis esse catholics must punish to a lesser degree, since an appeal
privandus bonis suis temporalibus vel puniendus in is a certain kind of punishment or a certain path towards
persona, multo magis licet cuilibet catholico appellare a the imposition of punishment. But the harm inflicted by
sententia pape pronuntiantis legem christianam esse an unjust papal sentence that definitively proclaims the
falsam. Maior istius rationis videtur manifesta. Minor, Christian law to be false must be punished by catholics
scilicet quod iniuria illata per talem sententiam pape est to a higher degree than any personal injury inflicted on
magis vindicanda etc., probatur, quia illa est iniuria someone by the sentence of a lesser judge. Therefore if it
Christi et Dei directe. Iniuria autem Dei magis est is permitted to appeal from the unjust sentence of a
vindicanda quam propria, teste beato Gregorio qui, ut lesser judge by which someone would be condemned to
habetur 23 q. 4 c. Si is, ait: "si is qui prelatus est debitori lose his temporal possessions or to be punished in his
dominico culpas impune dimittit, non mediocriter person, all the more is it permitted to any catholic to
profecto offendit, qui debita celestis regis et domini sua appeal from the sentence of a pope who proclaims that
presumptione resolvit. Ea namque que in nobis the Christian law is false. The major premise of this
committuntur, facile possumus dimittere, ea vero que in reason appears evident. The minor premises, namely that
Deum commissa sunt, cum magna discretione, nec the harm inflicted by such a papal sentence must be
tamen sine penitentia possumus relaxare". Et punished to a higher degree etc. is proved by the fact that
Chrysostomus super Mattheum ait: "in propriis iniuriis this is a direct assault on Christ and on God. And a
esse quempiam patientem laudabile est. Iniurias autem wrong done to God must be punished to a higher degree
Dei dissimulare nimis est impium". Augustinus etiam ut than a wrong done to one's self, witness blessed Gregory
habetur 23 q. 4 c. Si ea ait: "si ea de quibus vehementer who states in 23 q. 4 c. Si is: "if a prelate absolves
Deus offenditur insequi vel ulcisci differimus, ad someone without penance of sins against God, he
irascendum utique divinitatis patientiam provocamus". assuredly commits no light offense, in that he dismisses
Ex quibus patet quod iniuria Dei est precipue et magis by his presumptuousness what is owed to the Heavenly
quam propria vindicanda, et ita si licet a sententia King and Lord. For the misdeeds done to us we may
inferioris iudicis inferente iniuriam propriam appellare, easily forgive, but those committed against God we may
multo magis licet a sententia inferente Deo iniuriam, only loosen with great discretion and never without
cuiusmodi est illa sententia pape qua condempnatur imposing a penance". [col. 912] And here is what
fides catholica, appellare.
Chrysostom says in his Commentary on Matthew: "It is
praiseworthy to be somewhat patient about harm done to
one's self. But it is very impious to ignore wrongs
committed against God". [Ps.-Chrysostomus, Opus
imperfectum in Mattheum, homilia quinta, in PG 56, col.
668] Augustine likewise states in 23 q. 4 c. Si ea: "if we
delay pursuit or punishment of those things by which
God is greatly offended, we surely provoke divine
patience into righteous anger". [col. 926] It is evident
323

