apparent prima facie false non sunt penitus contemnende prima facie to be false should not be completely
. Assertionem enim pro qua fortiter allegasti in principio despised. For at first I thought that the assertion for
omnino irrationabilem arbitrabar, nunc autem non which you strongly argued was completely irrational,
videtur michi omni probabilitate carere. Unde ad yet now it does not seem to me to lack all plausibility.
rationem contra eam quam tetigi qualiter ipsius Tell me, therefore, how its defenders reply to the
respondeant defensores enarra.
argument against it which I touched on.
Magister: Rationem illam valde despiciunt, dicentes Master: They strongly disdain that argument, saying
quod est illorum qui naturam , originem et ordinem that it is advanced by people who do not know the
scientiarum ignorant . Aiunt enim quod quemadmodum nature, origin and order of the sciences [See J.A.
aliquis optime iudicat de mechanicis et aliis que tamen Weisheipl, =C170 336Classification of the Sciences in
facere nescit, sicut multi qui pingere, scribere, arma et Medieval Thought=C186 337, Mediaeval Studies, 27
naves ac alia artificialia fabricare ignorant melius quam (1965), pp. 54-90.]. For they say that just as someone
ipsi artifices iudicare noscuntur, ita scientie superiores, judges best mechanical and other [works] which
tractantes causas et principia illorum que in scientiis nevertheless he does not know how to make, as for
inferioribus considerantur, certius et clarius valent instance many men who do not know how to paint,
iudicare de illis, si eis proponantur, quam ille scientie write, or construct arms, ships and other works made by
inferiores. Unde et habentes perfectam notitiam scientie artisans are known to judge them better than the artisans
subalternantis que cognoscit principia scientie themselves, so the superior sciences, treating of the
subalternate certius iudicant de conclusionibus, et etiam causes and principles of matters considered in inferior
principiis, scientie subalternate quam habens sciences, can judge those matters more surely and
tantummodo notitiam scientie subalternate. Ita theologi clearly, if they are put to them, than the inferior sciences
et veri philosophi, propositis illis que in iure tractantur themselves. Thus also those who have perfect
canonico, profundius et certius poterunt iudicare de illis, knowledge of a subalternating science, which
quamvis sepe cum maiori labore.
understands the principles of a subalternated science,
judge more certainly about the conclusions, and even the
principles, of that subalternate science than do those
who have knowledge only of the subalternate science.
Thus theologians and true philosophers will be able to
judge more profoundly and surely, although often with
greater effort, about propositions which are treated in
canon law.
Discipulus:: Video quod ratio mea concludit de scientia Student: I see that my argument is conclusive only for a
solummodo que non est alteri subalternata nec science which is not subalternate or inferior to another.
subordinata, nam (ut evidenter aspicio) de scienti cui For I clearly see that it does not seem to have
alia scientia superior precipit , sicut est de frenefactiva plausibility about a science for which another, superior
respectu equestris et de illis que architectonice science lays down rules (as with bridle-making in
subiciuntur, de quibus in libro ethicorum et in libro respect of horsemanship, and about [sciences]
politicorum fit mentio, et de scientia cuius principia in subordinate to an architectonic [science], mentioned in
scientia superiori traduntur, apparentiam non videtur the books of Ethics and Politics ), and about a science
habere. Et ideo de theologia et scientia canonistarum whose principles are transmitted in a superior science.
dinoscitur colore carere, quia scientia canonistarum a [Cf. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, I.1, 1094 a10 and
theologia recipit sua principia, teste Innocentio tertio Politics, III.11, 1282 a5-6, 17-24; see also Posterior
qui, ut habetur Extra, De accusationibus, c. Qualiter et Analytics, I.13, 78 b35-79 a13 and Physics II.2, 194 a7quando, asserit manifeste quod "ex auctoritatibus novi et 12, 33-194 b8. According to Aristotle the user (e.g. the
veteris testamenti processerunt postea canonice educated person) judges the work of the artisan, the
sanctiones ". Quamvis igitur de istis possem querere horseman judges the work of the bridle maker: in
multa, quia tamen canoniste (aliarum scientiarum practical matters the end provides the criterion of the
terminos ignorantes) eorum intellectum non caperent, means. Of speculative sciences, some are subalternate to
cupio autem ut in hoc opere quantum potueris sic others (e.g. astronomy, optics, harmonics and mechanics
terminos proprios aliarum scientiarum a theologia et are subalternated to geometry. For Ockham's views on
scientia canonistarum evites quod omnia canoniste subalternation see Summa logicae, III.ii.21 (G. Gál and
intelligant. Idcirco illa que dicta sunt de ista materia S. Brown, eds. Opera Philosophica, 1 (St Bonaventure,
sufficiant, nec curo quod ad rationes pro prima opinione 1974), pp. 539-42 and J. Livesey, "William of Ockham,
respondeas, quia modo valde debiles michi videntur et Subalternate Sciences and Aristotle's theory of
qualiter ad eas responderi potest per predicta satis metabasis", British Journal for the History of Science,
apparet.
18 (1985), pp. 127-45.] And therefore in connection
with theology and the science of the canonists [my
argument] is known to lack colour, because the science
of the canonists receives its principles from theology, as
16

