But this argument takes as premise a heresy, which it was his obligation to prove. For it takes as premise that the
reward, which is the vision, is promised only for the time after the judgment, which it was his obligation to
prove.
And therefore nothing remains here except to answer his proof, which is ruled out by things often said. For as
has been said, the vision of God is promised to the whole person, and that promise, [TEXT] made concerning the
usual course of Providence, will not be fulfilled before the judgment. The vision is also promised to a soul
having nothing to be purged, and that promise is made for the time even previous to the general judgment. The
promise, or even more truly the fulfilment of the promise, mentioned in Matthew 25, is that which is made to the
whole person, and therefore it will not be fulfilled before the general judgment. However, it is consistent with
this for the promise made to a soul with nothing to purge to be fulfilled before the judgment. And thus it appears
that from the text, "Come, blessed of my father", etc, it cannot be inferred that holy souls will not see God
earlier, but it can be inferred that human beings composed of body and soul will not, in the ordinary course of
Providence, see God before then. But if it is asked, where is that reward promised to the soul with nothing to
purge?, it must be said that, as we read in Luke 13 [23:43], Christ promised that reward to all purged souls when
he said to the robber, "Today you will be with me in paradise". For he did not say this to the robber with
reference to his person, but with reference to his soul, and not only with reference to his soul, but with reference
to the purged soul. Therefore every purged soul comes to paradise. But by the "paradise" that is mentioned there
is meant the happiness of the heavenly kingdom, which does not exist without vision. And that Christ meant
such vision is shown by the passage of the Gospel text, for when the robber said to Jesus, "Lord, remember me
when you come into your kingdom", Jesus replied by saying, "Amen, I say to you, today you will be with me in
paradise". From these words we are given to understand that Christ meant by "paradise" the same as the robber
meant by Christ's "kingdom", but by Christ's kingdom the robber meant Christ's glory, which does not exist
without clear vision of God. And therefore by paradise Christ's meant the vision of God, so that the sense is this:
"Today you will be with the in paradise", that is, as I see, and will see, the deity, so you with me will today see
clearly the same deity.
From these and many other texts, which for the sake of brevity are omitted, it is plainly established that he
asserts something false when he says that it is found in sacred scripture that the vision of God is promised only
for the time after judgment. For, as has been said, it is promised to purged souls for the time before the judgment
in the text, "Today you will be with me in paradise", and in John 17[:24] when Christ said, "I wish that where I
am they also may be with me, so that they may see my glory", and in 1 Corinthians 13[:12] when the Apostle
says, "We see now through a glass darkly, then, however,"---namely when "prophecies are made void [vs. 8]"--"face-to-face". But the prophecies of which the Apostle speaks do not exist in heaven. Therefore souls that exist
in heaven see face-to-face.
That also this vision is already given, divine scripture manifestly asserts. For in Apocalypse 6[:11] blessed John
says, "Given to each of them them", the saints according to the soul, "are white robes", which are individual
visions of God. And when he says that it will be said after the judgment, "Come, blessed of my father, receive
the kingdom", etc, it is true, because then it will be said to whole persons, and therefore that promise will not be
fulfilled before the judgment, because whole persons, in the ordinary course of Providence, will not earlier
receive the kingdom of God; however, it is consistent with this that the souls of many will see God earlier.
And when he quotes the text of Christ, "When the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his Majesty, you also
will sit", etc, it must be said that the text will not be fulfilled before the general judgment; however, it is
consistent with this that the souls of the apostles now see God. For many and various things were promised to
the apostles, of which some are now fulfilled, others will be fulfilled on the day judgment but will cease after the
day judgment (and thus "You will sit upon twelve seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel", for after the day of
judgment they will not judge); others will be fulfilled on the day of judgment and will remain without end, for
example that they will be glorious in soul and body.
And when finally he says, "Rejoice, because your reward will be great in heaven", this is not to the point,
because it is certain according to him that the reward of souls is great in heaven, because according to him they
see and rejoice in the humanity of Christ, and this joy is great, according to him. It is manifest, therefore, that not
only will the reward of persons after judgment be great in heaven, but also the reward of souls now in heaven is
great, and therefore by the above words it can in no way be proved that the holy souls do not see God now, just
as through those words it cannot be proved that they now see the humanity of Christ.
CHAPTER 6
It continues:
If also the third point is noticed, namely to what end the general judgment of God is directed, it seems that the
judgment would happen in vain if that reward is given to souls before the judgment.
Here he lays down his last argument for the heresy in question, which is manifestly refuted by things said against
the previous arguments. For by it would be proved that the souls of the saints neither are in heaven nor have any
joy, because according to that argument the general judgment would happen in vain if the souls of the saints
were now rejoicing. For if he says that although the holy souls now have some joy, yet the judgment will not
525

