they infer that these opponents are to be forcefully
protected from every persecution and danger.
Discipulus: Proba primo quod tales sunt a morte Student: Start by proving that such are to be liberated
corporali liberandi.
from physical demise.
Magister: Hoc ostenditur auctoritate Salomonis que Master: This is shown by the authority of Solomon
allegata est supra, qui ait: "erue eos qui ducuntur ad (which was earlier cited in argument), [1 Dial. 6.43] who
mortem etc." Hoc etiam Augustinus, ut legitur 23 q. 4 c. states: "forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death
Ipsa pietas, videtur asserere manifeste, dicens quod si etc." Augustine likewise (as we read in 23 q. 4 c. Ipsa
duo fuerint in domo ruitura, si possumus ambos liberare pietas) obviously appears to assert this when he says that
tenemur, quia ut dicit ibidem: "nisi faceremus,non if two people were in a house about to collapse, we are
immerito crudeles iudicaremur". Si etiam duo fuerint in bound to liberate both if we can, because, as he states in
aliqua domo ruitura et neuter vult exire, sed unus vult that context: "unless we did this, we would deserve to be
necare seipsum si alter fuerit liberatus, illum unum a judged cruel". [col. 909] Indeed if there were two people
morte liberare debemus. Similiter si multi essent in in a house about to collapse, and neither wanted to leave
domo ruitura et si unus solus liberaretur omnes alii it, but one of them wanted to kill himself if the other was
seipsos precipitio vellent occidere, illum unum eruere liberated, we would be obligated to rescue the latter from
debemus. Igitur quilibet tenetur alium etiam invitum et death. Similarly, if there were many people in a house
nolentem liberare a morte, si potest, etiam si ob talem about to collapse and all the rest threatened to kill
liberationem unius alii vellent seipsos occidere. Ergo themselves on the spot if a single one of them was
multo fortius, si quis invite et iniuste trahitur ad mortem, liberated, we would be obligated to extract the latter.
alii qui possunt eum a morte liberare, tenentur. Ex quo Thus everyone is bound, if he can, to liberate another
sequitur quod qui possunt debent quesitos ad mortem from death even if the latter is reluctant and unwilling,
defendere, et ita si quis vult impugnantes papam de and even if others would want to kill themselves in the
heretica pravitate querere ad mortem, catholici qui event of such a liberation of this one person. Much more
possunt, vel armis resistendo si competit ipsorum strongly therefore, if someone is unjustly and
personis, vel querentes eos ad mortem verbis monitoriis unwillingly being taken to his death, others who have the
aut increpatoriis aut supplicatoriis et aliis modis quibus power to do it are obligated to liberate him from death. It
possunt, a tanta nequitia compescendo, vel quesitos ad follows from this that those who have the power to do
mortem occultando vel non tradendo, eos debent this must defend people wanted for death. And thus if
defendere.
someone seeks to inflict death on the opponents of a
pope who attribute heretical wickedness to the latter,
catholics who have the power to do it must defend the
opponents, either by armed resistance if this is
appropriate to their persons, or by restraining from such
a crime those who seek to inflict death on the opponents
of the pope (doing this by verbal warnings, reproaches,
or pleas, and by other methods available to them, or by
hiding or not surrendering the papal opponents wanted
for death).
Discipulus: Per istam rationem quicunque videret Student: By this argument whoever saw thieves, killers,
latrones et homicidas ac alios malefactores dampnatos a and other judicially condemned criminals being led to
iudice duci ad mortem eos si posset liberare deberet.
their death would be obligated to liberate them if
possible.
Magister: Ad istam instantiam respondetur quod secus Master: The answer to this point is that there exists a
est de illis qui servato ordine iudiciario condempnantur significant difference between individuals condemned to
ad mortem et de illis qui absque cause cognitione death by the process of judicial order, and individuals
propter hoc quod volunt superiorem impugnare pro who are exposed to mortal danger without their cause
causa pro qua licet superiorem impugnare mortis having been heard in court, merely because they want to
periculo exponuntur. Primi enim non sunt liberandi a oppose a superior in support of a cause for which it is
morte quia semper presumitur pro his que fiunt a iudice permitted to oppose a superior. Indeed the former are not
et pro sententia eius, nisi fuerit legitime reprobata vel to be liberated from death, because there always exists a
per appellationem vel per alium modum congruentem presumption in favour of the actions of a judge and in
suspensa. Et ideo tales dampnati non sunt a morte favour of his judgement, unless it has been legitimately
liberandi nisi a sententia iudicis legitime appellatum rebuked or suspended by an appeal or some other
existeret. Tunc enim liberandi essent ab illo qui posset. appropriate method. And therefore such condemned
Secundi vero liberandi sunt ab illis qui convenienter criminals must not be liberated from death unless a
possunt. Et ideo si papa mandaret aliquos capi et duci ad legitimate appeal has been issued from the sentence of
mortem propter hoc quod eum de pravitate heretica the judge. In that case they must indeed be liberated by
impugnare nituntur, liberandi essent, quia in hoc casu those who have the power to do so. The second category
364

