Christo potestatem super alios apostolos seu primatum.

power over them over them are called beneficent..
But not so with you." We are given to understand by
these words that no apostle should have exercised
power over the others. Therefore, blessed Peter did
not have from Christ power or primacy over the
other apostles.

Discipulus Iste auctoritates non videntur facere ad
propositum. Nam verba Christi predicta intelligi debent
de potestate temporali; beatus autem Petrus non habuit a
Christo potestatem temporalem super alios apostolos sed
spiritualem. Quare per auctoritates premissas probari non
potest nisi quod beatus Petrus non habuit potestatem
temporalem super alios apostolos qualem reges et
principes gencium noscuntur habere.

Student: Those texts do not seem to address the
point. For the above words of Christ ought to be
understood of temporal power. However, blessed
Peter did not have from Christ temporal power over
the other apostles but spiritual power. So it can be
proved by the above texts only that blessed Peter did
not have the temporal power over the other apostles
that the kings and rulers of the Gentiles are known
to have.

Magister Hanc responsionem conantur excludere,
ostendentes quod Christus cuilibet apostolo super alios
apostolos potestatem omnem temporalem et spiritualem
interdixit. Nam teste Hilario, ut legitur Extra De verbis
significacione c. Intelligencia, "Intelligencia dictorum ex
causis est assumenda dicendi." Verba ergo Christi
premissa ex causa dicendi debent intelligi; Christus
autem dixit verba predicta occasione accepta ex
contencione apostolorum quis eorum videretur esse
maior. Ita enim legitur Luce 22, "Facta est autem
contencio inter eos quis eorum videretur esse maior.
Dixit autem eis, 'Reges gencium'", etc. Inter ipsos autem
non fuit contencio de maioritate temporali sed spirituali.
Ergo Christus potestatem interdicens eisdem sub
potestate non solum temporalem sed spiritualem eciam
comprehendit; ergo beatus Petrus potestatem super alios
nec temporalem nec spiritualem accepit a Christo.

Master: They try to exclude this reply by showing
that Christ forbad any apostle to have any temporal
and spiritual power over the other apostles. For as
we read in Extra, De verborum significacione, c.
Intelligencia [col.913], Hilary attests that "the
meaning of what is said should be taken from the
reasons for speaking." The aforesaid words of
Christ, therefore, should be interpreted according to
his reason for speaking. Christ uttered the above
words, however, on the occasion presented to him
by the dispute among the apostles about which of
them would be seen to be greater. For we read as
follows in Luke 22[:24-5], "And there was also a
strife amongst them, which of them should seem to
be the greater. And he said to them, 'The kings of
the gentiles'" etc. The dispute among them,
however, was not about temporal but about spiritual
greatness. When Christ forbad them to have power,
therefore, he included not just temporal power but
spiritual power too. Therefore blessed Peter did not
receive from Christ any power, either temporal or
spiritual, over the other [apsotles].

Rursus: si aliqua potestas vel primatus spiritualis fuit
data beato Petro a Christo super alios apostolos data fuit
sibi per illa verba Iohannis ultimo, "Pasce oves meas";
sed per illa verba nulla fuit data potestas spiritualis vel
primatus super alios apostolos. Ergo primatum super
alios apostolos non accepit a Christo. Maior istius
racionis conceditur ab aliis. Minor probatur quia
spiritualiter pascere oves non contingit nisi tripliciter,
scilicet salutari doctrina et vita exemplari et disciplina et
correccione; sed quilibet istorum modorum pascendi
oves Christi communis fuit omnibus apostolis. Universi
enim apostoli omnes oves Christi doctrina pascere
debuerunt, ipsa veritate testante que omnibus precepit
apostolis Matthei ultimo dicens, "Euntes ergo docete
omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine Patris et Filii et
Spiritus Sancti, docentes eos servare omnia quecumque
mandavi vobis." Omnes eciam debuerunt pascere vita

Again, if any spiritual power or primacy was given
by Christ to blessed Peter over the other apostles it
was given to him by those words in the last chapter
of John [21:17], "Feed my sheep." But no spiritual
power or primacy over the other apostles was given
by those words. Therefore, he did not receive from
Christ primacy over the other apostles. The major
[premise] of this argument is granted by others. The
minor [premise] is proved because it is possible to
feed sheep spiritually in only three ways, that is by
beneficial teaching, by exemplary living and by
discipline and correction; but each of these ways of
feeding Christ's sheep was common to all the
apostles. For all the apostles were bound to feed all
Christ's sheep by teaching, as the Truth himself
attested when he gave this order to all the apostles in
the last chapter of Matthew [28:19-20], "Going

209

