omnibus si oppressi fuerint appellandum, quia non licet withdraws obedience from the one from whom he
eidem in eadem causa appellare ab aliquo et ad ipsum. appeals. But no Christian is allowed to withdraw
Sed omni christiano in causa heresis si oppressus fuerit obedience from the pope (dis. 12 c. Preceptis) [col. 27] .
licet appellare ad papam (2 q. 6 c. Si quis et c. Omnis et Therefore no Christian is allowed to appeal from the
c. Ad romanam 1 et c. Ad romanam 2), ergo nulli supreme pontiff. Fourthly thus: it is not permitted to
christiano licet in causa heresis appellare a papa. Quinto appeal from someone to whom all must appeal should
sic. Sicut imperator primatum habet in temporalibus ita they be oppressed, because it is not allowed to appeal
papa in spiritualibus primatum noscitur obtinere. Sed both to and from someone in the same case. But in a case
nulli pro aliqua causa temporali licet appellare ab of heresy every Christian, if oppressed, may appeal to
imperatore secundum leges. Ergo nulli licet appellare the pope (2 q. 6 c. Si quis [col. 467, 468, 472] , and c.
pro causa spirituali a papa, et per consequens pro causa Omnis [col. 467] , and c. Ad Romanam [col. 467] , and c.
heresis non est a summo pontifice appellandum. Sexto Ad Romanam 2) [col. 468] . Therefore no Christian is
sic. Ab illo ad quem sunt omnes cause fidei deferende allowed to appeal from the pope in a case of heresy.
non est pro causa fidei appellandum. Sed omnes cause Fifthly thus: just as the emperor possesses primacy in
fidei sunt ad summum pontificem deferende (24 q. 1 c. temporal affairs, so is the pope known to possess
Quotiens et Extra, De baptismo et eius effectu, Maiores primacy in spiritual affairs. But according to the laws no
et dis. 17 Multis). Ergo pro causa fidei non est a summo one is permitted to appeal from the emperor for some
pontifice appellandum. Ex quo concluditur quod si temporal cause. Therefore no one may appeal from the
contingeret aliquem contra papam temere appellare tali pope in a spiritual cause, and consequently one must not
appellationi esset minime deferendum et propter eam appeal from the supreme pontiff for cause of heresy.
non esset de papa aliqualiter inquirendum nec aliquid Sixthly thus: one must not appeal in a case of faith from
aliud innovandum.
someone to whom all such cases are to be directed. But
all cases of faith must be deferred to the supreme pontiff
(24 q. 1 c. Quotiens [col. 970] , and Extra, De baptismo
et eius effectu, Maiores, [col. 644] and dis. 17 Multis)
[cols. 51-52] . Therefore one must not appeal from the
supreme pontiff in a case of faith. From which the
conclusion is that if someone were to recklessly appeal
against the pope, such an appeal ought not to be
received, and there would be no obligation on its account
to inquire about the pope in any way or to make any
other changes in the existing state of affairs.
Capitulum 17
Chapter 17
Discipulus: Iste allegationes pro assertione predicta Student: The arguments in favour of the aforestated
videntur fortes, quarum virtutes magis advertam si assertion appear to be strong. I shall better grasp their
recitaveris quomodo respondetur ad illas et qualiter merits if you were to recite how one responds to them
assertio contraria fulciatur. Unde primo assertionem and how the contrary assertion is supported. Therefore
contrariam munire nitaris, secundo narra quomodo ad attempt first of all to strengthen this contrary assertion
rationes prescriptas respondetur.
and, secondly, recount how one responds to the
aforewritten reasons.
Magister: Assertionem contrariam melius intelliges si Master: You would understand the contrary assertion
tibi fuerit per particulas explicata.
better if its constituent parts were explained to you.
Discipulus: Hoc peto ut facias.
Student: I request that you proceed in this manner.
Magister: Assertio contraria medullitus explicata tres Master: The quintessential explanation of the contrary
continet conclusiones, quarum prima est quod a papa assertion involves three conclusions. The first is that one
catholico quamvis de heresi publice diffamato pro causa is not allowed to appeal directly for cause of heresy from
heresis directe appellare non licet, nisi forte aliquis a catholic pope (even a pope publicly slandered of
deceptus haberet iustam causam credendi papam esse heresy) unless, perhaps, one were deceived into having
hereticum. Secunda conclusio est quod a papa heretico just cause to believe that the pope is a heretic. The
licet appellare. Tertia conclusio est quod si aliquis de second conclusion is that one is allowed to appeal from a
facto appellaret a papa catholico, antequam constaret heretic pope. The third conclusion is that is someone
appellationem huiusmodi non esse legitimam esset were to appeal de facto from a catholic pope, his appeal
appellationi deferendum eiusdem.
would have to be legally honoured before it was
established that this appeal was not legitimate.
Discipulus: Istas tres conclusiones cupio per ordinem Student: I want to deal with these three conclusions in
pertractari. Primam autem cupio explicari quia plures proper order. But I want the first conclusion to be
partes continere videtur quas non bene intelligo. Ignoro explained [further] because it seems to contain a number
etiam quare illud adverbium "directe" adiungitur.
of distinct parts, which I do not quite understand. For
instance, I have no idea why the adverb "directly" is
297

