ut uno verbo quid sentiunt manifestent, dicant quod condemn effectively the pope's errors. Hence those
more bellatorum qui hostes suos aperte et per insidias et preachers and doctors who will have composed new
omnibus modis licitis quos excogitare valuerint works against the wickedness of a heretic pope and their
debellare nituntur, debent predicatores et doctores seu less creative colleagues both have the duty, as far as their
magistri aperte et per insidias publice et occulte ac talents allow, to effectively condemn the pope's errors
modis sibi convenientibus perfidiam pape heretici and to declare the contrary truth, impressing it on all
expugnare, nec aliter a culpa fautorie pravitatis heretice listeners as much as they can, in public lectures and
sunt immunes, quia non caret scrupulo societatis sermons, in secret conversations also, whenever there
occulte qui manifesto facinori desinit obviare (Extra, might be an opportunity to speak. Hence, so as to
De homicidio, Sicut). Quod intelligendum est cum quis disclose their view in one brief sentence, these
potest manifesto facinori obviare et non apparet in commentators would say that, following the custom of
promptu quod per alium facinus manifestum valeat fighters attempting to defeat their enemies directly, or by
prohiberi.
ambushes and all conceivably permissible methods,
preachers and doctors or masters must destroy the
treachery of a heretic pope directly or by ambushes,
publicly as well as secretly, by methods they find
convenient, nor are they otherwise free of the sin of
aiding and abetting heretical wickedness, because
"suspicion of involvement in secret conspiracy is not out
of place where someone who can, fails to act against an
obvious crime"(Extra, De homicidio, Sicut)[col. 795].
This is to be understood of a situation where someone
can prevent an obvious crime and it is not immediately
apparent that someone else can prevent the obvious
crime.
Et ideo si papa hereticus laboraret inficere orthodoxos, And therefore if a heretic pope were labouring to corrupt
doctores et predicatores regionum ad quas doctrina true believers, the doctors and preachers of regions
pestifera pape heretici perveniret, ne illarum incole where the pope's noxious doctrine had just arrived would
regionum averterentur a fide deberent viriliter obviare, have the duty to courageously stand against it. Lest the
nec carent in hoc casu scrupulo societatis occulte nisi inhabitants of those regions be alienated from the faith,
doctrine erronee pape obviarent si in regionibus illis nor in this case would the doctors and preachers be free
non essent alii qui doctrine pape erronee scirent, of suspicion of involvement in secret conspiracy unless
vellent, et possent resistere. Et ita predicatores et they opposed the pope's false doctrine, if there were no
doctores in Francia commorantes tenentur doctrinam others in those regions who might know how, and be
pape erroneam reprobare priusquam doctrina eadem in willing and able, to resist the pope's false doctrine. And
Francia ceperit publicari, vel probabiliter dubitatur so preachers and doctors residing in France are bound to
quod aliquos corrumpet in Francia nisi resistatur eidem. condemn the erroneous doctrine of the pope before that
Sic predicatores et doctores Italie debent ab eadem doctrine begins to spread in France, or there is probable
doctrina mortifera preservare Italiam, vel si in aliqua doubt that it might corrupt some in France unless it is
sui parte infecta fuerit debent conari purgare eandem. firmly opposed. Likewise, the preachers and doctors of
Et consimiliter de predicatoribus et doctoribus aliarum Italy must preserve Italy from the same deadly doctrine,
regionum in quibus morantur est dicendum. Si vero in or try to purify the land should Italy have become
Francia vel in alia regione sunt aliqui predicatores et infected in one of its parts. And the same must be said
doctores seu magistri qui sufficienter eandem regionem concerning preachers and doctors who reside in other
a dicta doctrina preservant vel expurgant, alii regions. If however there are some preachers and doctors
predicatores et doctores vel magistri regionis eiusdem or masters in France or in another region who
non tenentur de necessitate salutis doctrine illi obviare, sufficiently protect or purify that region from the stated
ex quo per alios ei sufficienter resistitur. Sed ubi alii doctrine, the other preachers and doctors or masters of
deficerent, ipsi se opponere murum pro fide catholica that region are not bound to oppose that doctrine by
contra papam hereticum tenerentur, alioquin in necessity of salvation, since there is adequate resistance
fautoriam pravitatis heretice inciderent iuxta to it by others. But where the others were to fail, then
auctoritatem superius allegatam ("nec caret scrupulo these preachers and doctors would be bound to stand as a
etc.")
stone wall protecting the catholic faith against a heretic
pope, otherwise they would lapse into the sin of aiding
and abetting heretical wickedness, as implied by the
authority posited earlier ("suspicion of involvement in
secret conspiracy etc.")
Discipulus: Videtur quod illa auctoritas et consimiles Student: It appears that this authority and similar ones
non debent de quibuscunque intelligi sed de illis must not be understood of all and sundry, but only of
445

