legis divine et legis nature catholicos obligare. Ubi delinquents, and to obligate catholics to observe the
autem non est nisi preceptum humanum, nisi ex causa commandments of divine law and of natural law. But
rationabili non voluntaria, non potest ad servandum where there exists only a human legal provision, the
idem preceptum catholicos sub gravi artare pena quin church, except for some reasonable and involuntary
saltem pro morte vitanda posset quis tale preceptum cause, cannot force catholics to observe this provision
pretergredi. In tali enim casu epyeykes interpretatur under threat of severe penalty, since someone might
legem humanam non esse servandam in illo intellectu bypass the church's command at the very least in order
quem verba prima facie sonare videntur. Sic, sicut to avoid death. For in such a situation, a reasonable
allegatum est supra, Bonifatius martyr iuramentuum person [epyeikes: cf. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics
suum quod prestitit de non communicando hereticis V.10] interprets the human law as not to be observed in
interpretatus fuit, quam interpretationem Zacharias the sense which its wording initially seems to convey.
summus pontifex approbavit. Cum igitur communicare Just so, as was argued earlier, [cf. 1 Dial. 7.58] did
corporaliter excommunicatis non est prohibitum a lege Boniface the martyr interpret his professed oath that he
divina neque a lege nature, per nullum preceptum would not communicate with heretics; and the supreme
humanum possunt regulariter christiani constringi quin pontiff Zachary approved this interpretation. Therefore,
pro
morte
vitanda
possint
communicare since physical communication with excommunicated
excommunicatis, licet ex causa et pro culpa aliqui, et pro persons is forbidden neither by divine law nor by the
aliquo tempore omnes, possint astringi ne cum aliquo law of nature, Christians may not, as a rule, be
excommunicato communicent etiam pro morte vitanda. constrained by any human precept so as to be prevented
Unde et tale quid posset accidere circa papam hereticum, from communicating with excommunicated persons in
quod
omnes christiani
possent
astringi
ne order to avoid death; although for cause and fault some
communicarent eidem etiam pro morte vitanda, sed hoc individuals, and at certain times all individuals, may be
non est regulare de omnibus christianis omni tempore forcibly ordered not to communicate with some
respectu
omnium
excommunicatorum.
Sed excommunicated person even in order to avoid death.
communicare excommunicato aliter quam corporaliter, And something of the sort may possibly happen with
puta in crimine, vel in hiis que ad ecclesiasticum respect to a heretic pope. All Christians may well be
officium pertinent, quo excommunicatus fungi non constrained not to communicate with him even in order
potest, est prohibitum a lege divina. Ideo ibi potest to avoid death. However, this is not an operative rule for
ecclesia addicere penam excommunicationis, ut nullus all Christians at all times and with respect to all
christianus taliter communicet excommunicato etiam pro excommunicated persons. But it is forbidden by divine
morte vitanda.
law to communicate with an excommunicated person
otherwise than physically, for instance to communicate
with him in a crime, or in those issues which pertain to
an ecclesiastical office which the excommunicated
person cannot exercise. Therefore in this case the church
may legally assign a penalty of excommunication, so
that no Christian communicate in this way with an
excommunicated person even on order to avoid death.
Capitulum 68
Chapter 68
Discipulus: Aliqua que in precedenti capitulo recitasti Student: Some of the things which you have recited in
aliquibus forsitan videbuntur obscura, que in tractatu De the preceding chapter will perhaps appear obscure to a
gestis circa fidem altercantium orthodoxam te faciam few, and I shall endeavour to have you explain them in
explicare. Ideo, illis omissis, dic qua pena receptatores the treatise On the deeds of those disputing about
pape heretici et sequacium eius sunt plectendi.
orthodox faith. Therefore, omitting them for the
moment, explain the punishment which receivers of a
heretic pope and of his followers ought to suffer.
Magister: Circa hoc possunt esse opiniones contrarie. Master: There may be contrary opinions concerning
Una, quod pena hereticorum sunt plectendi quia heretici this issue. One opinion is that they must suffer the
sunt censendi. Hec videtur esse opinio glosse Extra, De punishment of heretics because they are to be reckoned
hereticis, cap. Excommunicamus 1 # Credentes, que heretics. This appears to be the opinion of the gloss on
super verbo 'receptatores' ait: "sine quibus heretici the word "receptatores" in Extra, De hereticis, c.
manere diu non possunt, arg. ff. De offic. presid. lege Excommunicamus 1, # Credentes, which states:
Congruit, ff. De receptatoribus lib. 1. Unde merito isti "without such, heretics cannot remain secure for long,
sunt puniendi: imo gravius delinquunt, qui aliorum ff. De offic. presid. lege Congruit, ff. De receptatoribus
errores defendunt, et acrius puniri debent, 24 q. 3 c. Qui lib. 1. Hence, such individuals deserve to be punished:
aliorum. Et ideo simili pena cum hereticis puniuntur, 11. indeed the crime of those who defend the error of others
q. 3 c. Qui consentit". Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi is more serious, and they must be punished more
quod receptatores hereticorum gravius delinquunt quam harshly, 24 q. 3. Qui aliorum. And therefore they
heretici et simili pena puniendi sunt.
receive a penalty similar to that of heretics, 11 q. 3 c.
471

