concludes that those who doubt the legitimacy of the
discussed appeal or demurrer must obey the pope if the
latter does not honour it and commands others not to
honour it.
Secundo sic. Nulli clerico licet ante tempus sententie ab The second proof is this. No clerk is permitted to
episcopo suo discedere (8 q. 4 Nonne). Ergo multo withdraw from his bishop before sentence shall have
magis propter nullam appellationem vel recusationem been passed on the latter (8 q. 4 Nonne). [col. 599]
ante decisionem cause licet catholicis ab obedientia Therefore all the more no appeal or demurrer entitles
pape recedere. Ergo post recusationem vel catholics to withdraw from obedience to the pope before
appellationem huiusmodi est in omnibus obediendum a decision in the case. Therefore after such an appeal or
pape sicut prius. Ergo si papa precipit tali appellationi demurrer one must continue to obey the pope in all
vel recusationi nequaquam deferre, dubitantes talem things just as before. Therefore if the pope orders that
appellationem vel recusationem non esse legitimam ei such an appeal or demurrer should not be honoured,
non tenentur deferre. Aliter oporteret catholicos those who doubt the legitimacy of the appeal or
nescientes papam esse hereticum ab obedientia ipsius demurrer are not obligated to honour it. Otherwise it
recedere, quod nullatenus est tenendum.
would be appropriate for catholics who do not know that
the pope is a heretic to withdraw from his obedience,
which is not a tenable position.
Capitulum 47
Chapter 47
Discipulus: Non puto quod fortiores rationes quam sint Student: I do not think that stronger reasons than these
iste due pro assertione predicta valeant inveniri. Ideo two can be found in support of the aforementioned
plures nequaquam adducas sed dic quomodo assertion. Therefore refrain from providing additional
respondetur ad istas.
ones, and state how one responds to those, which have
just been advanced.
Magister: Ad primam respondetur de dubiis Master: The answer to the first reason is founded on a
distinguendo. Nam sicut distinguitur de ignorantia, distinction concerning doubtful matters. For just as there
prout legitur 1 q. 4 # Notandum, quod alia est ignorantia are distinctions to be made with respect to ignorance,
facti, alia iuris, et ignorantia facti alia est eius quod and we read this in 1 q. 4 # Notandum [col. 422] (there is
oportet scire et alia eius quod non oportet scire, et an ignorance of fact, and another of law, and as to
similiter ignorantia iuris alia est iuris naturalis, alia ignorance of fact there is ignorance of a fact which it is
civilis, sic est dubitatio facti et dubitatio iuris. Et alia est appropriate to know, and there is another ignorance, that
dubitatio facti quod oportet scire, alia est facti quod non of a fact which it is not appropriate to know; and
oportet scire. Et similiter alia est dubitatio iuris quod similarly as to ignorance of law, there is ignorance of
quis scire tenetur et alia est iuris quod quis non tenetur natural law and ignorance of civil law), so likewise there
scire.
is doubt about fact and doubt about law. And one kind of
doubt is with respect to fact which it is appropriate to
know, while another kind is with respect to fact which it
is not appropriate to know. And similarly there is doubt
about law which one is bound to know, and another kind
of doubt, about law which one is not obligated to know.
Per hoc respondetur ad primam rationem, quod quedam On the basis of these points the answer to the first reason
sunt dubia que oportet scire et quedam sunt dubia que is that there are some doubtful matters which it is
non oportet scire. In dubiis autem que non oportet scire appropriate to know, and other doubtful matters which it
est obediendum superiori, et in tali casu loquitur is not appropriate to know. Indeed in those doubtful
Augustinus in verbis superius allegatis. In dubiis vero matters which it is not appropriate to know, one's
que oportet scire non est semper obediendum superiori. superior must be obeyed, and this is the case Augustine
Si enim rex vel alius preciperet adorare Machometum describes in the words we earlier produced in argument.
vel servare legem Iudeorum, quamvis subditus dubitaret [1 Dial. 6.46] But in the doubtful matters which it is
tale preceptum esse contra legem Dei et iniquum appropriate to know, one's superior must not always be
nullatenus
excusaretur
a
peccato
obediendo, obeyed. For if a king or someone else were to order the
quemadmodum Iudei et alii minime excusantur licet adoration of Mohammed or the observance of Jewish
nesciant se malefacere. Sic dicunt in proposito, quod si religious law, then even if a subject doubted whether
aliquis dubitat an sit obediendum pape precipienti quod such an order was disreputable and against the law of
tali appellationi vel recusationi minime deferatur, God, he would in no way be excused from mortal sin if
dubitat de illo quod oportet scire et nullatenus dubitare. he obeyed the order, in the same fashion that Jews and
Quilibet enim capax rationis scire tenetur quod magis others can hardly be excused even though they do not
favendum est legi divine quam cuicunque mortali, et know that they are doing wrong. A similar understanding
ideo occurrendum est magis ubi imminet periculum holds, they say, with respect to the issue we are
legis divine quam ubi imminet periculum hominis discussing: that if someone doubts whether one must
356

