pertinaciter in doctrina erronea pape heretici persistit, way be convicted of pertinacity, then he is not to be
est fautor heretice pravitatis et hereticus reputandus.
considered guilty. If on the other hand he is not ready to
be corrected, but continues to pertinaciously hold the
erroneous doctrine of a heretic pope, then he is to be
reckoned a collaborator in heretical wickedness and a
heretic.
Si autem doctores et magistri docent publice doctrinam If, finally, doctors and masters publicly teach a false
pape erroneam quam sciunt per ipsum solempniter doctrine of the pope which they know to have been
diffinitam, et docent quod huiusmodi diffinitio pape est solemnly defined by him, and if they teach that such a
tenenda, sunt fautores heretice pravitatis et etiam definition of the pope is obligatory, they are to be
heretici reputandi, sive teneantur explicite credere reckoned collaborators in heretical wickedness and also
veritatem contrariam sive non teneantur ipsam explicite heretics, whether they are bound to explicitly believe the
credere. Huius ratio assignatur, quia quicunque contrary truth or whether they are not bound to believe it
pertinaciter adheret doctrine contra fidem est hereticus explicitly. Here is the proof of this statement. Whoever
reputandus. Sed doctores et magistri docentes pertinaciously supports a doctrine which is against the
diffinitionem pape erroneam esse tenendam pertinaciter faith is to be reckoned a heretic. But doctors and masters
adherent doctrine erronee diffinite, quia qui asserit who teach that a false definition of the pope is obligatory
quod irrevocabiliter et in omnem eventum est pertinaciously support a falsely defined doctrine, because
adherendum doctrine erronee, ipse pertinaciter adherere he who asserts that one must support a false doctrine
eidem doctrine censetur, quare est pertinax reputandus irrevocably and no matter what is to be considered as
et per consequens hereticus est censendus. Item, non pertinaciously supporting this doctrine, and therefore is
minus peccat doctor vel magister qui publice docet to be thought pertinacious, and consequently is to be
diffinitionem pape hereticam esse tenendam quam si reckoned a heretic. Again, a doctor or master who
consensisset quod papa doctrinam huiusmodi publicly teaches that a heretical definition of the pope is
solempniter diffiniret. Sed si doctor vel magister obligatory sins no less than if he had consented that the
consensisset quod papa doctrinam huiusmodi diffiniret pope should solemnly define such a doctrine. But if a
fuisset fautor heretice pravitatis. Ergo docendo quod doctor or master had consented that the pope should
diffinitio eius erronea est tenenda, est fautor heretice define such a doctrine, he would have been a collaborator
pravitatis reputandus.
in heretical wickedness. Therefore by teaching that the
pope's false definition is obligatory he is to be reckoned a
collaborator in heretical wickedness.
Capitulum 43
Chapter 43
Discipulus: Quia dubito quod, si unquam aliquis papa Student: I am uncertain, should some powerful pope
potens cui faveant reges et principes erit hereticus, favoured by kings and princes ever become a heretic, that
spiritus mendax erit in ore omnium vel plurium "a lying spirit" will be "in the mouth of all prophets" [2
prophetarum, id est doctorum, qui, secundum beatum Chronicles 18:21], or of many prophets, i.e. of doctors
Gregorium, ut legitur dis. 43 c. Sit rector, per prophetas who, according to blessed Gregory (one reads this in dis.
in sacro eloquio designantur, idcirco de doctoribus qui 43 c. Sit rector)[col. 153] are termed 'prophets' in Holy
forte erunt tempore pape heretici plura interrogare Writ. For that reason I intend to ask many questions (to
propono, ad que tu breviter studeas respondere. which you will endeavour to respond briefly) about the
Disseras autem in primis an doctores et magistri, si doctors who will perhaps exist at the time of a heretic
papa fuerit hereticus, teneantur contra doctrinam eius pope. First of all, however, discuss whether, should the
erroneam predicare et eam efficaciter reprobare.
pope be a heretic, doctors and masters would be
obligated to preach against his false doctrine and
effectively reject it.
Magister: Respondetur quod pro loco et tempore, Master: The answer is that, depending on time and
debitis circumstantiis observatis, omnes doctores sive place, and taking into account appropriate circumstances,
fuerint magistri sive in alio gradu docendi officium all doctors, whether they are masters or hold a different
habentes exercere in theologica facultate, sive fuerint teaching appointment in the faculty of theology, or
habentes tantummodo officium predicandi ad populum, whether they are simply charged with the function of
de necessitate salutis tenentur doctrinam pape erroneam preaching to the people, are bound by necessity of
(presertim si apud illos inter quos predicta exercent salvation to effectively reject the pope's erroneous
officia divulgatur, docetur, et tenetur) efficaciter doctrine (especially if this doctrine is popularized, taught
reprobare, et contrariam veritatem firmiter asserere. and maintained in the presence of those among whom the
Hoc videtur pluribus modis posse probari. Primo doctors exercise the aforementioned functions), and to
quidem sic. In omni certamine corporali et spirituali assert solidly the contrary truth. It appears that one can
laus precipua bellatorum in hoc videtur consistere prove this in many ways. First indeed in this manner. In
quod, suo duci indissolubiliter adherendo, hostes eius every physical and spiritual conflict paramount praise
quanto fuerint fortiores et periculosiores et seems afforded to fighters who, indissolubly supporting
428

