what assertion should be considered as catholic, what as
heretical.
Quarta ratio est hec. Ad illius scientie tractatores per The fourth argument is this. To judge which assertion
quam plures assertiones catholice explicite sub forma should be considered catholic, which heretical, pertains
propria pertractare approbantur principalius spectat more chiefly to the experts in the science found to treat
discernere que assertio catholica, que heretica, est the larger number of catholic assertions explicitly under
habenda, non ad illam in qua pauce veritates catholice their own form, not to one in which few catholic truths
explicite approbantur . Huiusmodi est theologia, non are explicitly approved. Such is theology, not the
scientia canonistarum, quia in scientia canonistarum science of the canonists, because few catholic truths are
pauce veritates catholice sub forma propria investigated under their own form in the science of the
pertractantur. Ergo talis diffinitio ad theologos canonists. Therefore such a decision is known to pertain
principaliter noscitur pertinere.
chiefly to theologians.
Quinta ratio est hec. Ad tractatores illius scientie per The fifth argument is this. To decide which assertion
quam antequam esset canonistarum scientia veri should be considered catholic, which heretical, pertains
catholici et fideles veritates catholicas approbaverunt, most chiefly to the experts on that science by which,
predicaverunt ac occulte et publice docuerunt before there was a science of canonists, true and faithful
doctrinasque hereticales et auctores earum confutaverunt Catholics approved, preached, and in private and public
reprobaverunt , et etiam dampnaverunt, principalissime taught catholic truths and refuted, rejected and
pertinet diffinire que assertio catholica, que heretica, est condemned heretical teachings and their authors. Such,
censenda. Huiusmodi autem est theologia, nam however, is theology, for before the canons were
antequam canones ederentur apostoli aliique discipuli produced the apostles and other disciples of Christ, as
Christi tanquam veri catholici , veritates catholicas being true catholics , approved, preached, and in private
approbaverunt, predicaverunt ac occulte et publice and public taught catholic truths and refuted, rejected
docuerunt doctrinasque hereticales et auctores earum and condemned heretical teachings and their authors.
confutaverunt, reprobaverunt et etiam dampnaverunt. And so, as we read in Titus 3[:10], blessed Paul taught
Unde et beatus Paulus, sicut legitur ad Titum 3, that a heretic should be avoided after a first and second
hereticum hominem post primam et secundam admonition. He also asserts openly in 1 Tim. 4[:3] that
correctionem devitandum docuit. Prima etiam ad the teaching of those "forbidding to marry, to abstain
Thimotheum
4
asserit
manifeste
doctrinam from meats, which God hath created to be received with
"prohibentium nubere, abstinere a cibis quos Deus thanksgiving by the faithful" clearly belongs to the spirit
creavit ad percipiendum cum gratiarum actione of error and the teaching of demons and, consequently,
fidelibus" ad spiritum erroris et doctrinam demoniorum, to heretical wickedness. Therefore such a decision
et per consequens ad pravitatem hereticam, pertinere. pertains chiefly to theology and, consequently, to
Ergo ad theologiam, et per consequens ad theologos, theologians.
principaliter pertinet diffinitio talis.
Sexta ratio est hec. Ad tractatores illius scientie cui, The sixth argument is this. To decide by way of teaching
quantum ad illa que fidei sunt, omnis alia scientia cedit what assertion should be considered as catholic and
principaliter per modum doctrine pertinet diffinire que what as heretical pertains chiefly to the experts on that
assertio catholica, que heretica, est censenda. Huiusmodi science to which every other science yields in respect of
est scientia scripture divine, que theologia vocatur, ut ex matters of faith. Such is the science of divine scripture,
decretis, dist. 9, per totum, et specialiter c. Noli et c. which is called theology, as is clearly gathered from the
Negare et c. Ego solis et c. Quis nesciat et c. Noli et c. whole of Decretals dist. 9, and particularly c. Noli
Neque colligitur evidenter. Ergo ad theologos [col.17], c. Negare [col. 17], c. Ego solis [col. 17], c.
principaliter talis diffinitio spectat.
Quis nesciat [col.17], c. Noli [col.18] and c. Neque
[col.18]. Therefore it is to theologians that such a
decision chiefly pertains.
Septima ratio est hec. Ad tractatores illius scientie cuius The seventh argument is this. The aforesaid way of
auctor immediatus est Deus, a quo est tota fides nostra, defining pertains chiefly to the experts on that science
principaliter pertinet diffinitio antedicta. Talis autem est the direct author of which is God, from whom comes all
theologia, quia scriptores scripture divine nichil penitus our faith. Such, however, is theology, because the
conscripserunt ex humano ingenio sed ex inspiratione writers of divine scripture wrote absolutely nothing out
divina solummodo, teste beato Petro, qui canonica sua of their human wit but out of divine inspiration only, as
secunda c. 1 ait, "Spiritu sancto inspirati locuti sunt blessed Peter attests when he says in 2 Peter 1[:21],
sancti Dei homines ". Propter quod docet beatus Petrus, "The holy men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy
ut patet ibidem, quod prophetia scripture divine, per Ghost". That is why, as is clear in the same place [2
quam totam scripturam sacram intelligit, nequaquam est Peter 1:20-1], blessed Peter teaches that the prophecy of
interpretanda humano ingenio, dicens : "Omnis divine scripture, by which he means the whole of sacred
prophetia scripture propria interpretatione non fit. Non scripture, should not be interpreted by human wit. He
enim voluntate humana allata est aliquando prophetia." says, "Scripture prophecy is not made by private
5

