appeal against him for cause of heresy. And in order to
prove that one may have just cause to believe that
someone is a heretic, although in truth that someone is
not a heretic, turn to the arguments presented in book ???
of "The best method of learning".[cf. Introduction to 1
Dial. 6.16-35]
Capitulum 18
Chapter 18
Discipulus: Non requiro pro nunc plures allegationes Student: I am not at this point asking for additional
pro tribus assertionibus supradictis, quia de aliquibus arguments in support of the three aforementioned
earum postea occasionem habebo loquendi. Ideo ad assertions, because I shall later have the opportunity to
secundam conclusionem principalem te converte et ad speak about some of them. Proceed therefore to the
probandum quod licet a papa heretico appellare allegare second main conclusion, and attempt to present
coneris.
arguments proving that one is permitted to appeal from a
heretic pope.
Magister: Antequam adducantur allegationes quod a Master: Before adducing arguments that it is
papa heretico liceat appellare expedit tibi, forte ut eas permissible to appeal from a heretic pope, it is perhaps
melius intelligas, modum ponendi explicite aperiri.
convenient to explain this proposition to you more
explicitly, so that you may better grasp the arguments in
question.
Discipulus: Hoc volo.
Student: This is what I want.
Magister: Ponentes licere a papa heretico appellare Master: Those who contend that it is permitted to appeal
nollent ad strictissimam significationem appellationis from a heretic pope would not wish to be bound by the
artari.
most precise understanding of what constitutes an
"appeal".
Discipulus: Ergo appellatio habet plures significationes. Student: Therefore an appeal can mean many things.
Magister:
Quod
nomen
appellationis
plures Master: Alexander III (in Extra, De appellationibus, c.
significationes habeat Alexander tertius (Extra, De Cum sit romana) [col. 411] openly suggests that the term
appellationibus, c. Cum sit romana) aperte insinuat, "appeal" has many meanings, saying: "the sacred canons
dicens: "sacri canones etiam extra iudicium passim allow one to occasionally appeal even outside of the
appellare permittunt, non solent huiusmodi dici judicial process; such statements are not usually called
appellationes sed provocationes ad causam". Ubi dicit appeals but challenges to appear in court". The gloss
glossa: "loquitur de appellationibus que fiunt extra [col. 909] explains this as follows: "he speaks of appeals
iudicium ab adversario, ne faciat aliquid in preiudicium from an opponent made outside of the courtroom, lest
appellantis super eo pro quo appellat, et tales this opponent do something prejudicing the appellant on
appellationes quasi provocationes sunt ad causam, et the substance of his appeal. Such appeals are, so to
talibus appellationibus est deferendum (infra eodem, speak, challenges to appear in court. Such appeals must
capitulo Bone) et tales appellationes faciunt clerici be legally honoured (see below, same section, c. Bone)
frequenter in se et in electionibus et pro aliis negotiis [col. 429]. Clerks are frequently involved in such appeals
ecclesie, supra De electione c. Consideravimus et c. among themselves, in matters of elections and other
Bone et c. Auditis, infra, De his que fiunt a maiori parte ecclesiastical affairs (see above, De electione, c.
capituli, c. 1." Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod Consideravimus [col. 53], and c. Bone [col. 66], and c.
appellatio plures habet significationes. Aliqua enim Auditis [col. 74], and below, De hiis que fiunt a maiori
appellatio est que continet querelam inique sententie et parte capituli, c. 1[col. 506] ". One gathers from these
fit a iudice. Aliqua autem est appellatio que non continet words that an appeal has many meanings. For one type
querelam inique sententie, que quandoque non est a of appeal is that which complains of an unjust sentence,
iudice sed est provocatio quedam ad causam ne aliquid and here the appeal is from a judge; while another type
fiat illicite.
of appeal is that which does not complain of an unjust
sentence, and which is sometimes not an appeal from a
judge, but a kind of challenge to appear in court, so that
nothing would be done illegally.
Discipulus: Applica ista ad propositum.
Student: Apply this to the matter at hand.
Magister: Dicunt assertores predicti quod largissime uti Master: The aforementioned theorists say that they want
volunt nomine appellationis, ne videantur concedere to use the term "appeal" in the widest sense, lest they
quod appellans a papa heretico eo ipso quod appellat might appear to concede that he who appeals from a
habet papam hereticum pro iudice, quia eo ipso quod heretic pope recognizes the heretic pope as a judge by
aliquis appellat a papa heretico habet ipsum pro non the very fact of the appeal; because by the very fact that
iudice, quem tamen ad causam provocare intendit, ne in someone appeals from a heretic pope, that someone
preiudicium appellantis et omnium catholicorum papali refuses to recognize him as a judge, intending
299

