From these texts it is plainly clear that this doctor holds that one who has such an act of hope does not have the
hope that is a theological virtue. But if hope is taken for an act of hoping, in the way faith is sometimes taken for
the act of believing (of which Augustine says, "Faith according to which we believe what we do not see",
according to what is noted in the Gloss, Extra, De summa trinitate et fide catholica, c. Firmiter), in this way it
must be said that an act of hoping in respect of the divine vision is not consistent with clear vision, but the act of
hoping for other things to come and not yet had is consistent with clear vision.
However, when he says that this is clear from Thomas 1-2, it is answered that Thomas there meant that the faith
that is a theological virtue is not consistent with clear vision; the act of hoping for something still in the future,
however, is consistent with it, just as (as was said) is exemplified concerning Christ, in whom there existed
simultaneously clear vision and the act of hoping for the glory of impassibility and immortality. The statement
that "the souls of the saints hope for the resurrection of the body until the last day" is granted, because they hope
not through the hope that is a theological virtue, which primarily relates to the glory of the soul, but through an
act of hoping --- which according to some proceeds from love of God, according to others from God and the
divine essence, according to others from a certain acquired habit of hope that is not the theological virtue,
according to others from the desire of being reunited with the body. However, these opinions are not to be
discussed at present, but this is to be held, that without the habit of hope that is a theological virtue the souls of
the saints hope by an act of hope for the resurrection of the body, not for the vision of the divine essence.
When the minor is proved by the text of Job, "On the last day" etc., it must be said that by means of those words
it is proved that the souls of the saints hope for the resurrection of the body, but is not proved by them that the
souls of the saints have the hope that is a theological virtue or an act of hoping that is inconsistent with clear
vision. And when he tries to prove the same minor by the words we read (he says) in the Apocalypse, that "The
souls of the saints demand, and murmuring implore vengeance for their own blood", it must be said that he does
not quote the text of the Apocalypse correctly. For although it is said in Apocalypse that "they cry with a loud
voice, saying 'How long, O Lord, holy and true, do you not judge and avenge our blood upon those that dwell on
earth?'" --- from which it follows that they desire, implore and hope for the avenging of their own blood, and
therefore they have the act of hoping not for the clear vision but for the vengeance---we do not find in the
Apocalypse that the souls of the saints "by murmuring" implore that vengeance. For the word "murmur" in
divine scripture is taken always, or more often, in a bad sense and seems to have some kind of sadness attached
to it. But the souls of the saints elicit no bad act and have no sadness, and therefore it should not be granted that
they murmur concerning the delay of vengeance. In the above words, therefore, when he says "murmuring
implore", he seems to be suggesting yet another manifest heresy, namely that the saints in heaven are not
completely freed from every evil of fault and punishment.
CHAPTER 2
There follows in the fictitious and worthless retractation the second argument he made, which was was as
follows.
Souls cannot be exalted beyond the clear vision of the divine essence, because there is nothing higher than the
highest, and it has been said that that clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls. But on the day of judgment
God will exalt the saints and their souls. Therefore until then they do not see God face-to-face; [***Ballweg's
comment: Goldast and Trechsel, but no manuscript, nor the editio princeps, continues: Because until the day of
judgment we pray and ask that he should exalt us to the salvation prepared. Since, as we read in Apocalypse, the
souls of the saints are under the altar until the day of judgment, and after that day above the altar they will see
God face-to-face, as blessed Bernard expounds it. It is also proved by a text of blessed Peter, who says (1 Peter 5
[cf. vs. 6], "That he should exalt us to the salvation prepared".***] otherwise they would not be exalted then. He
proved the minor of this argument: For until the day of judgment, we read that blessed Peter says, "That he
should exalt us" [1 Peter 5:6] to the salvation prepared
These words of this man's protestation or revocation, if understood as he meant them, manifestly contain many
heretical things and others that are ambiguous and open to dispute.
The first heretical point is that a soul that sees the divine essence cannot be exalted to a higher degree of
perfection.
The second heretical point is that if someone's soul sees the divine essence, the whole man, composed of the soul
that sees the divine essence and a body, cannot be exalted. (That the above words contain these two points is
clearly apparent, because in them he manifestly asserts that if the souls of the saints now see God face-to-face,
neither the souls of the saints nor the saints themselves would be exalted on the day of judgment.)
The third heretical point is that the souls of the saints do not see God face-to-face until the day of judgment.
The first ambiguous (or multiplex) and disputable point is that souls cannot be exalted beyond clear vision of the
divine essence.
The second is that clear vision is the highest exaltation of souls.
That the first (namely that a soul seeing the divine essence cannot be exalted to a higher grade of perfection) is
erroneous is proved [1] first as follows. The soul of blessed Paul attained beatitude, according to the truth [2
Corinthians 12:2]. According to him, it will attain a greater and more perfect degree of vision of the divine
516

