eiusdem. Si enim miles in bello viderit socium ab obligated to perform military service at his own expense
adversariis fortiter impugnatum et in mortis periculum on behalf of that person so as to save his life. If for
constitutum, debet, si potest, non sperando ab ipso instance a soldier involved in battle were to see a partner
stipendium ipsum de periculo liberare.
strongly pressed by enemies and in mortal danger, he
would if he could be obligated to liberate the partner
from danger without hope of receiving remuneration
from him.
Discipulus: Miles recipit stipendium a principe pro Student: The soldier receives a salary from the ruler in
principe et aliis sibi fidelibus defendendis quando order to defend when possible the ruler and the latter's
potest. Quare debet absque stipendio recipiendo a socio faithful. Therefore he must defend a partner whenever
ipsum quando expedierit defensare.
required without expecting to receive remuneration from
the partner.
Magister: Sicut miles recipit stipendium a principe Master: Just as the soldier receives a remuneration from
etiam pro aliis comilitonibus quando expedierit the ruler which also applies to a defense of his fellow
defendendis, ita quilibet recipit preceptum a Deo et a soldiers when the situation warrants, so does everyone
lege nature pro sociis quando necesse fuerit receive a command from God and the law of nature to
defendendis. Non minus autem obligatur quis ex defend partners whenever necessary. And a precept of
precepto divino et lege nature quam ex stipendio recepto God and of the natural law obligates one no less than a
a principe. Quare sicut miles tenetur comilitones salary received from the ruler. Therefore just as a soldier
defendere quando convenienter potest, ita quilibet is bound to defend his fellow soldiers when he
tenetur socium defendere quando convenienter potest. conveniently can, so is everyone bound to defend a
partner when he conveniently can.
Discipulus: Dic qualiter ad obiectionem ultimam Student: State how one responds to the final objection.
respondetur.
Magister: Respondetur quod quamvis per leges nemo Master: The answer is that although no one is forced by
cogatur benefacere, tamen sepe per leges cogitur quis the laws to provide a benefit, one is nevertheless
bonum facere. Lex enim neque divina neque humana frequently forced by the laws to perform a good act.
cogit benefacere, quia sicut dicit Augustinus post verba Indeed, neither divine nor human law orders the
que allegasti: "benefacere nemo potest nisi elegerit, nisi provision of benefits, since Augustine states right after
amaverit, quod est in libera voluntate". Ex quibus verbis the words which you used in argument that "no one can
colligitur quod sicut voluntas non potest cogi ita nemo provide a benefit unless he chooses to, and out of love,
potest cogi benefacere. Potest tamen quis cogi bonum which is the preserve of free will". One gathers from
facere, et quandoque quidem absolute, quandoque these words that just as the will cannot be coerced,
autem conditionaliter. Et sic per leges divinas et neither can anyone be forced to provide a benefit. But
humanas cogitur quis conditionaliter benefacere, scilicet someone may be forced to perform a good act, the
(si voluerit vitare penam temporalem vel eternam) obligation being indeed absolute at certain times and
socium, cum potest, defendere.
merely conditional at others. And thus divine and human
laws force one to the conditional provision of a benefit,
namely, to defend a partner when possible, if one wishes
to avoid both a temporal and an eternal penalty.
Discipulus: Istam responsionem rationabilem arbitror, Student: I consider this to be a reasonable response. But
cui tamen glossa super illo verbo 'cogimini' repugnare the gloss on the words "you are forced" [the words are in
videtur, cum dicit: "qui enim ex timore benefacit, the canon Ad fidem col. 939] appears to conflict with it
reputatur non facere". Ex quibus verbis colligitur quod when it states: "for he who provides a benefit out of fear
aliquis potest benefacere ex timore, et ita aliquis saltem is deemed to have done nothing". [col. 1348] One
timore
conditionaliter
cogitur
benefacere, gathers from these words that someone may provide a
quemadmodum cogitur bonum facere.
benefit out of fear, and thus someone is conditionally
forced to provide a benefit at least out of fear, just as he
is forced to perform a good action.
Magister: Respondetur quod glossa intentionem textus Master: The answer is that the gloss would have
Augustini expressius habuisset si dixisset: "qui ex grasped the intention of Augustine's text more precisely
timore bonum facit reputatur non facere", sicut had it stated: "he who performs a good action out of fear
Augustinus, ut habetur Extra, De regulis iuris, dicit: is deemed to have done nothing". Just so does Augustine
"qui ex timore facit preceptum, aliter quam debeat facit, state (as recorded in Extra, De regulis iuris): "he who
et ideo iam non facit". Potest tamen dici quod glossa carries out a command out of fear acts otherwise than he
posuit 'benefacere' pro 'bonum facere'. Non est autem should, and therefore is deemed here to have done
dubium quin leges cogant bona facere et ideo sepe metu nothing [meritorious]". [col. 928] It may nevertheless be
legum nonnulli bona faciunt et ita timore benefaciunt, said that the gloss used the expression 'to provide a
accipiendo 'benefacere' pro 'bonum facere'. Sed benefit' as an equivalent of the expression 'to do a good
348

