think about those five groups. Would you first tell me,
however, whether everyone thinks that a pope who
enters [office] canonically is unable to become a
heretic.
CAN A POPE BECOME A HERETIC?
Magister De hoc sunt opiniones contrarie. Sunt enim
quidam dicentes quod papa intrans canonice errare
potest contra catholicam veritatem et pravitati heretice
pertinaciter adherere. Alii autem dicunt quod papa
intrans canonice contra fidem errare non potest.

Master: There are opposing opinions about this. For
some people say that a pope who enters [office]
canonically can err against catholic truth and cling
pertinaciously to heretical wickedness. Others say
however that a pope who enters [office] canonically
can not err against the faith.

Discipulus Quomodo primi opinantes se muniunt non
differas explicare.

Student: Do not put off explaining how those who
maintain the former opinion support [their position].

That a pope can become a heretic
Magister Assercionem predictam auctoritatibus et
exemplis ac eciam racionibus fulcire nituntur. Primo
autem hoc auctoritate beati Pauli conantur ostendere.
Nam ad Hebreos 5 sic legitur,"Omnis pontifex ex
hominibus assumptus pro hominibus constituitur in hiis
que sunt ad Deum ut offerat dona et sacrificia pro
peccatis; qui condolere possit hiis qui ignorant et errant
quoniam et ipse circumdatus est infirmitate." Ex quibus
verbis colligitur quod omnis pontifex ex hominibus
assumptus, qualis est eciam summus pontifex, sicut
condolere potest hiis qui ignorant et errant, ita eciam
infirmitate, id est potencia ignorandi et errandi,
circumdari dinoscitur.

Master: They try to uphold that assertion by citing
authorities and examples and also by reasoning. They
try to show it first by the following text of blessed
Paul. For we read as follows in Hebrews 5[:1-2]. "For
every high priest taken from among men is ordained
for men in the things that appertain to God, that he
may offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins, who can
have compassion on them that are ignorant and that
err, becase he himself is compassed with infirmity."
We gather from these words that just as every priest
taken from among men - and the highest pontiff is
also such a one - can have compassion on the ignorant
and on them that err, so also they are known to be
compassed with infirmity, that is with the capacity for
ignorance and error.

Item prima ad Corinthios decimo c. Apostolus
generaliter ammonet omnes in gracia minime
confirmatos dicens, "Qui se existimat stare videat ne
cadat." Ex quibus verbis datur intelligi quod omnis
homo in gracia minime confirmatus potest cadere in
peccatum et per consequens potest errare contra fidem.
Papa igitur sicut et alii potest errare contra fidem.

[See Significant Variants, para. 27.] Again, in 1
Corinthians 10[:12] the Apostle utters a general
warning to everyone not confirmed in grace when he
says, "Wherefore he that thinketh himself to stand, let
him take heed lest he fall." We are given to
understand by these words that every person not
confirmed in grace can fall into sin, and consequently
can err against the faith. Just like others, therefore, the
pope can err against the faith.

Item Apostolus ad Galatas c. 6 universitatem erudiens
prelatorum quomodo debeant subditos suos astruere
ait, "Si preoccupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos
qui spirituales estis instruite huismodi in spiritu
lenitatis, considerans teipsum ne et tu tempteris." Ex
quibus datur intelligi quod de omni delicto in quo
preoccupatus fuerit subditus potest prelatus temptari et
consimile delictum committere. Cum ergo a predicta
admonicione Apostoli papa minime sit exceptus et
subditi possunt errare contra fidem, considerare debet
eciam summus pontifex ne de errore contra fidem

Again, when the Apostle is teaching the whole body
of prelates in Galatians 6[:1] how they ought to
instruct their subjects he says, "If a man be overtaken
in any fault, you who are spiritual, instruct such a one
in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou
also be tempted." We are given to understand by this
that a prelate can be tempted by the same fault by
which his subject has been overtaken and can commit
the same fault. Since therefore the pope has not been
excepted from that warning of the Apostle, and his
subjects can err against the faith, the highest pontiff

165

