your mother?" Romulus said: "Your unhappiness
deserves these things. Because you have abandoned the
immortal gods and your royal descent, and because it has
been your desire to be contaminated with magic." Then he
ordered that she, half-burned, be thrown back into prison.
II

II

Et iussit adduci Maximum presbyterum, et Archelaum And he ordered that Maximus the presbyter and
diaconum; quibus, et dixit: "Per vos et doctrinam vestram Archelaus the deacon be brought before him, and to them
blasphemantur nomina deorum, et circumducitis homines, he said: "Through you and your teachings people revile
ut non credant secundum morem antiquitatis". Respondit the names of the gods, and you deceive people, so that
Maximus presbyter et dixit: "Non nos seducimus they do not believe according to the ancient customs".
homines: sed quantum gratia Dei donat per ipsum Maximus the presbyter replied and said: "It is not us who
nostrum Iesum Christum liberamus de errore saeculi; et mislead the people, but as much as the grace of God
mancipamus nomini sancto eius". Tunc Romulus dixit: allows through that very Jesus Christ our God, we liberate
"Isti quidem digni sunt morte". Et iussit Quiriacum from worldly mistakes, and we handle property in His
episcopum, et Sanctum Maximum presbyterum, et holy name". Then Romulus said: "These men should die".
Archelaum diaconum et omnes milites ad arcum ante And he ordered that Quiriacus the bishop, the holy
theatrum capite caedi. Quorum corpora iussit iactari in Maximus the presbyter, Archelaus the deacon and all the
mare. Quos beatus Eusebius collegit et ad littus maris, et soldiers be beheaded near the arch (of Caracalla) in front
in campo abscondit et sepelivit iuxta urbem in crypta via of the theatre. He ordered that their bodies be thrown into
Hostiense. Taurinum, Herculanum etiam Portu Romano the sea. The blessed Eusebius collected the bodies, hiding
abscondit. Beatum Theodorum tribunum posuit in them near the sea-shore, in the fields, and burying them
mausoleo suo et omnes alios collegit, et posuit eos iuxta near Rome in the necropolis of the Via Ostiensis. He
corpora sanctorum Quiriaci episcopi et Maximi secretly buried Taurinus and Herculanus in Portus
presbyteri.
Romae. He put the blessed Theodorus the tribune to rest
in his own mausoleum, and collected all the others, and
put them to rest near the bodies of the holy Quiriacus the
bishop and Maximus the presbyter.
III

III

Post dies quinque iussit sibi Romulus beatam Auram After five days Romulus ordered that the blessed Aura be
repraesentari. Quae cum affuisset aspectibus Romuli brought before him. When she was standing in front of
gaudens dixit ad eum: "Miser quid perdidisti dies tuos ? him she rejoiced and said: "Unhappy man, why have you
Cognosce creatorem tuum Christum Filium Dei et noli been wasting your days? Recognize your creator Christ
adorare lapides vel aes aut aurum vel argentum: sed adora the Son of God, and do not worship stones, bronze, silver
Dominum Iesum Christum Crucifixum: qui resurrexit or gold, but worship the Lord Jesus Christ, who was
tertia die et ascendit in caelos: inde venturus est iudicare crucified, who rose from the grave on the third day and
vivos et mortuos, et saeculum per ignem". Cui respondit ascended to heaven, from where he will come to judge the
Romulus: "Modo videbis Christum tuum: quem credis si living and the dead, and the world through fire". Romulus
non sacrificaveris diis". Beata Aura dixit: "Bene dixisti replied: "In a moment you will see your Christ, in whom
miser, et aliquando protulisti veritatem ex ore tuo dicens you believe if you will not have sacrificed to the gods".
nihil, si non sacrificavero daemoniis fuerat victus." Iussit The blessed Aura said: "Well spoken, unhappy man, and
ut lapide maxillae eius coederentur diutissime. Clamabat for once the truth has come from your mouth, when you
autem Beata Aura dicens: "Gloria tibi Domine Iesu say that he was not overcome at all, if I will not have
Christe, quia merui inter servos tuos cognominari". sacrificed to the demons". He ordered that her jaws be
Romulus dixit: "Iam consule generositati tuae, et adora beaten with a stone for a long time. The blessed Aura
deos, et sacrifica et accipe virum saecundum natales cried out: "Glory to you Lord Jesus Christ, because I have
tuos". Cui fiducialiter Beata Aura voce clara dixit: "Ego deserved to be called one of your servants!". Romulus
virum habeo dominum coeli et terrae Iesum Christum, said: "Now focus on your nobility, worship the gods,
quem tu miser negasti te scire, sed cognoscis daemones sacrifice, and accept a man in accordance with your
qui cor tuum insania et rabie impleverunt". Iratius descent". Confidently and with a clear voice the blessed
Romulus eadem hora iussit ante conspectum suum Aura said to him: "I have a man, the Lord of heaven and
plumbatis eam deficere. Quae cum diu caederetur magis earth, Jesus Christ, whom you, unhappy man, have
confortabatur, et dedit in eam sententiam, lapidem refused to know. Instead you recognize demons, who
magnum ligari iussit ad collum eius, et praecipitari in have filled your heart with madness and rage". Romulus,
mare. Cuius corpus sanctus pervenit ad littus. Beatus vero enraged, ordered that she be disheartened by the scourge
Nonnus collegit corpus eius et sepelivit in praedio ipsius, with lead balls, immediately, in his presence. But the
ubi habitaverat foras muros portae Hostiae nono Calendis longer she was beaten the more she was strengthened.
4

