Septembris.

And he sentenced her, ordered that a large stone be tied
around her neck, and that she be thrown into the sea. Her
holy body washed ashore. But the blessed Nonnus
collected her body and buried her on her own estate,
where she had lived, outside the walls and the gate of
Ostia, on 24 August.

IV

IV

Tum Romulus tenuit Sabinianum quendam agricolam loci Then Romulus detained Sabinianus, a farmer from her
illius, et coepit ab eo quaerere facultates Beatae Aurae estate, and he started demanding from him her fortune,
dicens: "Sacrilega Aura quae magis elegit per magicas saying: "The sacrilegious Aura, who preferred to die
artes mori quam vita nobiscum frui, tuae amicitiae semper through magic, rather than to enjoy life with us, has
fuit communis. Thesaurum eius vel ornamenta ante always enjoyed your friendship. Now quickly bring to our
conspectum nostrum declarare festina, et sacrificia diis, et presence her fortune and jewels, and sacrifice to the gods,
vive et humiliare secundum iussa principum". Sabinianus and live and be humble according to the Imperial orders".
dixit: "Ego vero semper humilitates doctus sum a Sancta Sabinianus said: "But I have always been taught to be
Beata Aura, quae me docuit confiteri dominum meum humble by the holy, blessed Aura, who taught me to
Iesum Christum, qui natus est de Spiritu Sancto ex Maria acknowledge my Lord, Jesus Christ, who was born from
Vergine. Nam aurum aut argentum vel margaritas non me the virgin Mary through the Holy Spirit. And you should
habere scias, nisi dominum Iesum Christum". Romulus know that I do not have gold or silver or pearls, except for
dixit: "Succurre tibi, et occultos thesauros principum the Lord Jesus Christ". Romulus said: "Do yourself a
redde, et sacrifica diis, et recede ab insania falsa". favour, and return the hidden treasure of the Emperor, and
Sabinianus dixit: "Ego quidem mereor caedi pro peccatis sacrifice to the gods, and give up the false madness".
meis, sed gratias ago Domino meo Iesu Christo, et credo Sabinianus said: "No, I deserve to be beaten for my sins,
me idoneum esse ad cognoscendam eius misericordiam, but I thank my Lord Jesus Christ, and I believe that I am
etiam qui mihi dignatus est sua gratiam in baptismo capable of recognizing his compassion, He who has even
donare. Nam hoc scias aurum temporale me non habere, deemed it worthy to bestow his grace on me through
ac daemoniis cervices meas non flectere. Fac quod vis". baptism. And you should know that I do not have this
Iratus Romulus iussit ut cum plumbatis cervices eius temporal gold, and that my neck does not bow for
tunderentur, sub voce praeconia: "Deos et deas principum demons. Do what you want". Romulus, enraged, ordered
blasphemare noli".
that his neck be beaten by the scourge with lead balls, and
in a very loud voice said: "Do not revile the gods and
goddesses of the Emperors!"
V

V

Eodem die audiens hoc beatus Hyppolitus senex obtulit se On the same day the blessed Hippolytus, by now an old
in conspectu Romuli, cui ita voce clara dixit: "O miser si man, who had heard this, visited Romulus, to whom he
scires, non cruciatibus dares cervices sanctorum, sed te spoke as follows, in a clear voice: "Unhappy man, if only
ipsum humiliares, et crederes Deo, et Domino Iesu you knew, you would not torture the necks of the holy
Christo, et servis eius, et non lapidibus vanis, et metallis". ones, but be humble yourself, and believe in God, and the
Iratus Romulus praecepit, ut pedibus et manibus legatis in Lord Jesus Christ, and his servants, and not in fruitless
foveam vivus mergeretur. Beatus vero Hyppolitus dum stones and metal". Romulus, enraged, gave instructions
mersus fuisset in foveam ante muros Portus Romani, vox that he be plunged alive into a pit, with shackled hands
audita est per spatium horae unius, quasi infantium and feet. But when the blessed Hippolytus had been
clamantium, deo gratias. Romulus dixit: "Hoc insania thrown into a pit in front of the walls of Portus Romae, a
magicae artis esse cognosco".
noise was heard during a period of one hour, sounding
like children thanking God aloud. Romulus said: "I
recognize this as the madness of magic".
VI

VI

Tunc cum furore clamante coepit dicere: "Hic Sabinianus Then, enraged, he started shouting and said: "This
qui captus est cupiditate magicae artis, et libidine Sabinianus who is consumed by a desire for magic and a
thesaurorum in momento eum confringam, aut avellam a longing for riches, soon I will break him in pieces or tear
terra, si non se humiliaverit diis, et sacrificaverit eis". him away from the earth, if he will not have been humble
Quibus dictis iussit eum fustibus caedi, sub voce before the gods, and will not have sacrificed to them".
praeconia: "Redde thesauros principum, et humilia te diis After having said this he ordered that he be beaten with
a quibus gubernatur res publica". Ille autem dicebat: clubs, and said in a very loud voice: "Hand over the
"Gratias ago tibi Domine Iesu Christe, qui dignatus es me treasure of the Emperor, and be humble in front of the
cum servis tuis sociare". Cum vero diu caederetur, firma gods who govern the state". But he said: "I thank you,
5

