enim annorum decem qui resuscitatus est nomine from the darkness to the light". Then they instructed him
Faustinus. Eodem tempore nunciatum est Claudio: quia in the faith, and when he had been baptized and had
mortuus suscitatus fuisset per orationem sanctorum: et received the sign of the cross, the blessed Aura took him
dixit Claudius: "Hoc non est praeter artem magicam." Et under her care, because the resuscitated boy, called
vocavit ad se vicarium urbis nomine Ulpium Romulum: Faustinus, was ten years old. At the same time it was
cui haec praecepsit dicens: "Sacrilegam Auram quae reported to Claudius that a dead person had been
obscuravit genus regiae potestatis suae: et cum magicis resuscitated through the prayers of the holy ones. And
artibus desiderans semper habitare, poenis constringe: ita Claudius said: "This can only have been done through
ut si sacrificaverit et crediderit diis deabusque: vivat et magic". And he summoned the vicarius Urbis called
inscriptio mea firmata aboleatur: aut qui inventi fuerint Ulpius Romulus, whom he informed, saying: "Hold the
cum ea societate participes simul poenis crucientur."
sacrilegious Aura in check through punishment. She has
beclouded her royal descent, and wishes to live
permanently with magical practices. If she will have
sacrificed to the gods and goddesses and confided in
them, then she will live and the accusation brought by me
will be withdrawn. On the other hand, those who will be
found to participate in that association will be punished
and tortured at once".
I (pars II)

I (part II)

Veniens (autem) Ulpius Romulus in civitatem Hostiam Ulpius Romulus went to the city of Ostia and ordered that
iussit omnes sanctos custodia mancipari. Diluculo autem all the holy ones be put into custody. Getting up at dawn
surgens iussit sibi beatam Auram repraesentari: cui sic he ordered that the blessed Aura be brought before him.
dixit: "O insania magicae artis quae in te floret: quid He said to her: "What mad predilection for magic
egisti ut perderes regiam maiestatem et natales claros pervades you? Which need has made you squander your
obscurares ?" Beata Aura respondit: "Ego obscuravi royal majesty and becloud your illustrious lineage?" The
daemones et deserui idola vana, et manufacta, et cognovi blessed Aura replied: "I have beclouded the demons and
unicum Deum vivum, et verum, et Deum Iesum Christum abandoned the man-made, worthless idols, and I have
Filium eius: qui venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos: et recognized the only living God, the true God, and Jesus
patrem tuum diabolum una cum Claudio vos in tenebris Christ, our God, his Son, who will come to judge the
habet damnare". Vicarius Romulus dixit: "Inducta ad living and the dead, and to condemn the devil, your
insania magicae artis desere vanitates istas et consule father, who, together with Claudius, holds you in
generositati tuae". Beata Aura insufflavit in faciem vicarii darkness". Romulus the vicarius said: "You have a mad
dicens: "Miser si scires Deum creatorem coeli, et terrae: desire for magic! Give up those false beliefs and focus on
non proferres ex ore tuo blasphemies". Iratus autem your nobility!" The blessed Aura blew into the face of the
Romulus vicarius iussit eam in eculeo suspendi: et cum vicarius and said: "You poor man! If you knew God, the
attraheretur nervis: facie alacris, et speciosa coepit dicere: creator of heaven and earth, your mouth would not utter
"Gratias ago tibi Domine Iesu Christe: qui me de inferis such blasphemies". But Romulus the vicarius, enraged,
ad sublimia caelestia dignatus es sublevare". Et dixit ordered that she be fixed to the wooden horse. And while
Romulus: "Ubi est ? Quem praedicas Christus tuus liberet they stretched her sinews with force she said, with a
te". Beata Aura respondit: "Ego digna non sum, sed ille cheerful and beautiful face: "I thank you Lord Jesus
qui dignatus est me de caligine mundi eripere, potens est Christ, who has deemed it worthy to lift me from the
te et Claudium destruere". Et dum hoc dixisset confractus underworld to the lofty heavens". And Romulus said:
est eculuens; et depositam exinde iussit eam fustibus "Where is he, your Christ, who according to you will
caedi sub voce praeconia dicens: "Sacrilega Aura noli liberate you!" The blessed Aura replied: "I am not
blasphemare deos, et regnum gubernatores". Illa autem worthy, but He who has deemed it worthy to carry me
dicebat: "Benedictus es Domine Iesu Christe quem ego away from the obscurity of the world, has the power to
iam video". Tunc Romulus ad ministros dixit: "Date destroy you and Claudius". And when she had said this
flammas ad latera eius" et cum applicatae fuissent the wooden horse broke in pieces. When she had been
flammae; gaudens voce clara et facie speciosa dixit ad taken down from the apparatus he ordered that she be
Romulum: "O infelix! pudor tibi non est conspicere beaten with clubs, saying, with the volume of a public
membra genitricis tuae in cospectu ignibus assari ?". crier: "Sacrilegious Aura, do not revile the gods and those
Romulus dixit: "Tua infelicitas haec meretur; quae who govern the state!". But she said: "Blessed is the Lord
deseruisti deos immortales et regiam potestatem, et Jesus Christ whom I can already see!". Then Romulus
desiderasti magicis artibus coinquinari." Tunc semiustam said to his assistants: "Hold flames next to her sides", and
iussit retrudi in custodiam.
when the flames were burning she said to Romulus,
happy, in a clear voice, and with a beautiful face:
"Unhappy man! Are you not ashamed to watch how my
members are being roasted by fire, when you think of
3

