hyminis et laudibus offerebant. Praeterea Maximus the deacon, who made daily sacrifices to God in the form
presbyter tanta mirabilia in nomine Domini Iesu Christi of hymns and praises. Moreover Maximus the presbyter
exercebat: ut dum quis (l. is ) introisset ad beatum worked miracles of such a magnitude in the name of the
Censurinum: statim vincula de manibus et pedibus ei Lord Jesus Christ, that as soon as he had joined the
solvebantur. Tunc aperiens os suum beatus Maximus blessed Censorinus, the chains were released from his
coepit dicere ad custodes: "Fratres derelinquite daemones hands and feet instantly. Only then did the blessed
et idola varia: et cognoscite Dominum Iesum Christum Maximus open his mouth, and did he address the guards:
perpetuum regem: qui fuit ante saecula et est: et venturus "Brothers, abandon the demons and all those idols, and
est iudicare vivos et mortuos et saeculum per ignem. Nam recognize the Lord Jesus Christ, the perpetual king, who
coelum et terra transeunt: Dominus vero meus Iesus has always existed and lives, and who will come to judge
Christos nunc et semper et in aeternum erit". Custodes the living and the dead, and the world by fire. For the sky
dixerunt ad Maximum presbyterum: "Et quid faciemus, ut and the land will pass, but my Lord Jesus Christ will live
cognoscamus hunc, quem tu praedicas ?" Maximus now and always and for all eternity". The guards asked
presbyter dixit: "Baptizetur unusquisque vestrum: et Maximus the presbyter: "And what should we do, so that
credite in Christum Deum: et idola vana derelinquite, et we can acknowledge what you preach?" Maximus the
poenitentiam agite: quia nescientes blasphemastis nomen presbyter replied: "Let each of you be baptized, and
eius sanctum: et multos sanctos ipsius interemistis." Tunc believe in Christ, our God, and abandon the meaningless
Felix, Maximus, Taurinus, Herculanus, Nevinus, idols and do penitence, because you have reviled His holy
Historacinus, Menna, Commodius, Hermis, Maurus, name unknowingly, and killed many of His saints". Then
Eusebius, Rusticus, Monaxius, Armandinus, Olympius, Felix, Maximus, Taurinus, Herculanus, Nevinus,
Eipros et Theodorus tribuni (l. tribunus) decem septem Historacinus, Menna, Commodius, Hermis, Maurus,
miserunt se ad pedes beati Maximi ut baptizarentur: qui Eusebius, Rusticus, Monaxius, Armandinus, Olympius,
mox consuetudinem et baptizati sunt, et acceperunt Eipros and Theodorus the tribune, all seventeen of them,
gratiam Christi. Tunc sanctus Quiriacus episcopus threw themselves at the feet of the blessed Maximus,
Chrismate Christi eos perunguens signavit illos verbis wishing to be baptized. And soon they were baptized in
fidei.
the usual way, and received the grace of Christ. Then the
holy Quiriacus the bishop, anointing them with the
unction of Christ, made them familiar with the words of
the faith.
III

III

Sutor autem erat in eodem loco: cuius filius eadem hora Now in that same place was a shoemaker, whose son had
mortu fuerat. Transeunte autem beato Quiriaco et died at that very moment. The shoemaker was lamenting
Maximo et beata Aura, lamentabatur sutor in morte filii the death of his son, when the blessed Quiriacus and
sui. Tunc beatus Maximus presbyter dixit ad sutorem: "Tu Maximus and the blessed Aura passed by. Then the
crede in Deum Iesum Christum coram omnibus nobis: et blessed Maximus said to the shoemaker: "You there,
tu vives et filium tuum recipies." Ille autem cum believe in Jesus Christ our God in the presence of us all,
lachrymis dixit: "In quo credam: quem a iuventute meo and you will live and receive your son!" But he said in
blasphemavi
?"
Respondit
beatus
Maximus: tears: "In what should I believe? In something that I have
"Poenitentiam age: quia Deus poenitentium est non reviled since my youth?" The blessed Maximus replied:
reddens secundum peccata nostra: sed faciet secundum "Do penitence, because God does not respond to our
suam magnam misericordiam." Sutor autem dixit: "Ego repentance according to our sins, but acts according to his
credo in Deum Iesum Christum." Tunc beatus Maximus great compassion". Then the shoemaker said: "I believe in
baptizavit eum in nomine Patris et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti: Jesus Christ our God". Then the blessed Maximus
et dum accepisset signum Christi gaudens et exultans baptized him in the name of the Father and the Son and
deduxit beatum Quiriacum et Maximum presbyterum ad the Holy Spirit, and when he had received the sign of
filium suum. Tunc beatus Quiriacus episcopus dixit: Christ, delighted and rejoicing, he took the blessed
"Domine Iesu Christe qui dignatus es formam servi Quiriacus and Maximus the presbyter to his son. Then the
suscipere: ut nos de servitute diaboli liberares: qui blessed Quiriacus the bishop said: "Lord Jesus Christ,
Lazarum iam poenitentem (l. foetentem) suscitare who has deemed it worthy to take the shape of a slave, so
dignatus es: et filium unicum viduae redonasti: ostende that you could liberate us from the servitude to the devil,
super hunc famulum tuum tuam misericordiam: ut who has deemed it worthy to raise Lazarus, already
cognoscat et Deum vivum, et verum, creatorem nostrum stinking, from the dead, and who returned to a widow her
in regeneratione sua: quia tu regnas in saecula only son! Bestow your compassion on this servant of
saeculorum." Et cum omnes respondissent Amen: revixit yours, so that he may experience the living God, the true
qui erat mortuus: et coepit loqui dicens: "Ego vidi Deum God, our Creator, in his own regeneration, for you rule
Iesum Christum reducentem me de tenebris ad lucem." for all eternity". And when all in their turn had said Amen
Tunc cathechizavit eum: et cum baptizatus esset et he who was dead lived again, and he started talking and
accepisset signum crucis: suscepit eum beata Aura: erat said: "I have seen Jesus Christ our God, taking me back
2

