0268-0270- Acta Martyrum ad Ostia Tiberina

Below is the Latin translation of an ancient Greek manuscript in the Vatican, published by Simone de Magistris
in 1795. There is also an ancient Latin version of the same story, with slight differences (Acta Sanctorum,
Augustus IV, p. 757 ff.).
The "Acts of the Martyrs at Ostia on the Tiber" tell the story of a girl called Chryse in Greek, and Aurea in Latin
(but De Magistris has translated Chryse as Aura). The events took place during the reign of Claudius II
Gothicus (268-270 AD). There is no reason to doubt that the story is based on facts. Aurea was buried on the
spot of the modern village Ostia Antica, where a church dedicated to her was later built. However, other
martyrdoms have been added to the story, such as those of Taurinus and Herculanus, and of Hippolytus (see
also Meiggs 519 ff.).
I (pars I)

I (part I)

Temporibus Claudii, praesidente vicario Ulpio Romulo During the reign of Claudius II Gothicus, when a vicarius
magna persecutio orta est in Christianos. Erat quidam named Ulpius Romulus was in command, a large-scale
praepositus magisteriae potestatis, et in occulto persecution against the Christians began. There was a
Christianus, timens Deum, et credens in virtute Domini certain commander with magisterial power, who was
Iesu Christi, quotidie in absconditis suis orationibus et secretly a Christian, fearing God, and believing in the
ieiuniis epulabatur et elaemosynis. Hic ante Claudium virtue of the Lord Jesus Christ, every day in his secret
aspectum non recedens, sed si quos vidisset e Christianis prayers, and he observed fasting and gave alms. The
ad necem trahi, vel ad custodiam publicam, occulte presence of the Emperor did not deter him, but when he
confortabat, et quantum ei, largiebatur victum in saw that some from the Christian community were
carceribus, ministrabat et vinculis et custodiis. Hoc audito dragged to a violent death or to prison, he secretly
Claudius rex iratus iussit eum teneri et ante conspectum comforted them, and - as much as he could - catered for
suum adduci, cui ita dixit: "Tu es vir ille Censorinus their wants in jail and tended to the chains and guards.
deorum cultor, aeternae maiestatis semper affabilis ? When king Claudius heard this, he was enraged and
Mansuetudo nostra nullam servientem sibi despexit, sed ordered that he be arrested and taken to him, and then said
in culturam deorum semper nos rempublicam gubernantes to him: "So you are that man Censorinus, worshipper of
propagamus." Tunc Censorinus respondens dixit: "Ego the gods, always kind to the eternal majesty? There is
testimonium dico de domino Iesu Christo: quia ipse est nothing of service that our clemency has not respected,
verus Deus: quia crucifixus est et sepultus: et resurrexit but through the worship of the gods we always preserve
ipsis videntibus, qui eum crucifixerunt: quia praedixerat those who govern the state!". Then Censorinus replied
quod post mortem viveret; et videntibus illis ascendit in and said: "I bear witness to the Lord Jesus Christ; because
coelum. Hic nostris temporibus dignatus est venire a Patre He is the true God; because He was crucified and buried;
in uterum Virginis: qui quidem sic dignatus est and He arose from the dead, which was seen by the very
descendere ad terras ut coelum non desereret." Tum iratus people who crucified Him; because He predicted that He
Claudius dixit: "Insanis Censurine" et iussit eum propter would live after dying; and as they watched, He went to
militiae consortium Hostiae in custodia mancipari. Ille heaven. He deemed it worthy to descend from His Father
autem in custodia et in vinculis obligatus Deo laudes die to the womb of the Virgin in our days; but He deemed it
noctuque canebat.
worthy to descend to earth in such a way, that He would
not leave heaven". Then Claudius, enraged, said: "You
are crazy, Censorinus!", and ordered that he be put into
custody at the military outpost of Ostia. He however sang
the praises of the Lord day and night, in captivity and
constrained by chains.
II

II

In ea civitate erat quaedam virgo ex genere regiae In that city was a certain girl of royal descent called Aura,
potestatis nomine Aura: quae multas iam persecutiones who had already experienced many persecutions resulting
experta ex inscriptionibus, fuerat damnata, cum viris from accusations. She had been condemned, and lived on
religiosis et sacris virginibus in praediolo suo vacabat. a small estate that she owned, with God-fearing men and
Haec quotidie ad sanctum Censurinum die noctuque holy women. She visited the holy Censorinus daily,
veniens omnia victualia ministrabat: cuius et vincula during the daytime and at night, and took care of his
manu sua abluens. Oculos et faciam suam lavabat. Erant livelihood. She cleaned his chains with her own hands,
enim et in eodem loco sanctus Maximus presbyter et and washed his eyes and face. Now in that same place
Archelaus diaconus: qui quotidie sacrificia Deo cum were also the holy Maximus the presbyter, and Archelaus
1

