colerium: a collar.
colibertus: a tenant in socage.
colideus: a Culdee.
colingaria. See coningeria.
collactanea: a fostermother.
collardum. See cuillardum, cullardus.
collare: a ruff.
collarius: carying a load on the neck.
collationare: to collate.
collecta: a collection.
collectaneus: a companion.
collectare, collectarium: a book containing collects.
collistrigium: a pillory.
colobium: a tunic without, or with short, sleeves; a tabard.
colonellus: a colonel.
color: rhyme.
colorare: to rhyme.
colpicium: a pole.
colpo: a fragment; a small wax candle.
columbare: a dovecote.
columbaria: putlog holes.
columbarius: a keeper of pigeons.
columbella: a pigeon.
colustrum: new milk.
comba: a combe, valley.
combustio: trial of money at the Exchequer.
comes: an ealdorman; a count; an earl.
comestio: dinner.
comitatio, comitatus: a county; a county court.
comitiva: a company.
commandare. See commendare.
commarchia: a frontier.
commater, commatrix: used for the relationship between one who has held a child at baptism and the mother,
O.E. gomm; a godmother.
commenda: a deposit; when a benefice is given to a layman, or to a clerk for a time, it is said to be given in
commendam; a commandry, a benefice in the order of the knights of St. John.
commendare: to lend, to deposit; to order; to put oneself under the protection of another.
commendatarius: one who holds a living in commendam.
commendatitius: of commendation, esp. literae.
commendatus: a person who puts himself under the protection of his superior by doing voluntary homage.
commensale: board; diet; commons.
commensalis: a fellow-boarder, fellow-commoner.
commensare: to begin.
commissarius: a commissary, one who exercises spiritual jurisdiction by commission of a bishop.
commissio: a commission.
commissionarius: one who acts by commission; a commissioner.
commonitio: summons.
commorancia: dwelling, residence.
commothum: a commote, a quarter, or some say a half of a cantred.
communa: common land or property; right of common; commons; a community; a fiscal regulation.
communantia: the communance, the folk having the right of common.
communare: to enjoy the right of common.
communaris: a fellow-citizen.
communarius, communiarius: a commoner.
communes: commons at a college or Inn of Court.
communia: a corporation or community.
communia (pl.): commonalty; commons; ordinary business of a court.
communiae: commons.
communiare: to have right of common.
communicare: to have right of common.
35

