androchiarium: a dairy.
anelacium: a knife; a dagger.
anella: a manacle, a handcuff.
angaria: a vexatious personal service; distress; the Ember weeks.
angarialis: grievous.
angariare: to compel.
angarius: a catchpole, an officer who arrests.
angeldum, angildum: the single valuation or fine imposed on a criminal.
Algleria: Englishry.
Angliceria: Englishry.
Anglici probatio: proof of Englishry.
animalia: oxen.
animequus: contented.
anitergium: a wisp of grass.
ankerissa: an ancress, a female hermit.
annales: yearling cattle.
annatae: first fruits; annates.
annatus: first-born; one year old.
annuale: yearly income of a prebendary; or of a priest for celebrating an anniverary.
annuarium: an anniversary; a calendar of anniversaries.
annuatim: yearly.
annulatus: ringed (of a pig).
anquiromagus: a ship's stern.
ansea: a truss.
ansorium: a shoemaker's knife; a razor.
antecessor: an ancestor; a predecessor in office; also the name of a servant attending on a dean and chapter.
antecinerales feriae: days before Ash Wednesday.
antegarda: vanguard.
antela: a poitrel.
antemurale: a barbican.
antenatio: the right of an elder child.
antependium: hangings in front of an altar.
antephalarica: a portcullis.
antesellum: a package carried in front of the saddle.
antesignatus (antesignanus): a soldier posted in front of the standard.
antianitas: antiquity, i.e. seniority; ancienty.
antianus: old, ancient.
antibata: an opponent.
antica: a hatch.
anticopa: a countertally.
antidoron: a gift given in exchange.
antigraphus: a scribe, a copyist.
antilopia: an antelope (heraldic).
antipera: a screen.
antiphona: alternate verses sung by the halves of the choir.
antiphonarium: a book containing anthems or antiphons.
antiphonista: an antiphoner, a leader in singing antiphons.
antiquitas: seniority; ancienty.
antistes: a bishop; an abbot.
antistita: an abbess.
antistitium: a monastery.
antithetarius: an accused person who charges his accuser with the same crime.
apanagium: the portion of a younger child.
apatisare: to agree; to ransom.
apechiamentum: impeachment.
aporia: poverty; trouble.
aporiare: to impoverish.
apostare: to transgress.
apostolos petere: to appeal to Rome.
apothecarius: a shopkeeper; a keeper of a granary or store; a druggist.
8

