disvadiare: to receive or to redeem a pledge.
diurnalis: as much land as can be ploughed in one day with one ox.
diurnare: to pass the time; to remain; to journey.
divadiare. See disvadiare.
dividenda: a dividend.
divisa: a device; a devise; a boundary; a dole.
divisibilis murus: a party wall.
doageria: a dowager.
doarium. See dotarium.
dobelettum: a doublet.
docillus: a faucet.
docinna, documa: a tithing, error for decenna.
dodarium. See dotarium.
dola: a portion, a dole; a faucet.
dolare: to distribute.
dolea. See dola.
doleum: a tun (dolium); also used for a hogshead.
dolfinus: the Dauphin.
domanium. See dominicum.
domesticus: of the same house (monastery).
domicella, domicilla: a young lady; a servant; a nun.
domicellus: the young son of a nobleman; in the Roman Court, the same as camerarius; a servant in a
monastery.
domifex: a carpenter.
domigerium: danger; power.
domina: a lady; a dame.
dominatio: a demesne.
dominatus: lordship.
dominica: Sunday.
dominici panni: Sunday clothes.
dominicum: a demesne.
dominicus: of a lord; used on Sunday.
dominicus panis: bread used at the Mass.
dominigerium. See domigerium.
dominium: lordship.
dominus: a title applied to a peer, to a lord of a manor, to a clergyman, and to a bachelor of arts.
domnus, dompnus: a contraction of dominus, used especially for clergymen.
donatissia: as a gift.
donativum: a benefice given by the patron without presentation or institution.
donator, donatorius: a donor.
donatus: a donee.
doracus: a john-dory (zeus faber).
dormiens mensa: a table dormant, a fixed table.
dorrea: a john-dory.
dorsale, dossale: a dorser, dorsal, dossal, tapestry hung against a wall, especially a cloth hung above an altar; a
packsaddle.
dorsamentum: used for endorsamentum.
dorsorium: a dosser, a basket to carry on the back. See dorsale.
dortorium: a dormitory, dortour.
dos: a dowry, sometimes dower.
dosserium. See dorsorium.
dotalicium: dower.
dotarium: a dower, the portion of a widow or wife.
dotata, dotissa: a dowager.
dracena: a tiller.
dragetum, dragium: drage, a coarse kind of corn.
dragma: an ornament; a gem.
drana: a drain, a watercourse.
draparius: a draper; a standard bearer.
drappus: cloth.
47

