esuniare: to essoin.
esuniator: an essoiner.
eucharistia: the sacrament; the consecrated bread; a ciborium.
evaginare: to unsheathe.
evangelare: a service-book containing the gospels.
evangelizare: to preach the gospel.
eventio: profits (of a church).
evitaneus: eternal.
ewagium: toll paid for water passage.
ewanglia: the gospels.
exactor: a collector; a sheriff; a beadle.
exallar: an axletree (?),
examitum: samite, a silk stuff, sometimes interwoven with silver or gold; also used for an amice.
exartum. See assartum.
exbannire: to banish.
exbrancatura: outer branches.
excacta, excaeta: an escheat.
excaldare: to scald.
excambia: exchange.
excambiare: to exchange.
excambiator: an exchanger; a broker.
excambium: an exchange.
excarletum: scarlet.
excaturizare: to scald.
excaudare: to scald.
excayare: to escheat.
exclusa. See esclusa.
exclusagium. See esclusagium.
excrustare: to remove the crust of; to spoil.
excudia: a swinglestock, a wooden instrument used in beating flax.
excurtare, excurtiare: to dock the tail of a horse or dog.
excusatorius: containing or giving an excuse.
excussio: driving out; sometimes used for rescue; thrashing corn.
excussorium. See excudia.
exelerarius: a cup bearer.
exemplificare: to copy.
exempnium, exennium: a present; a new year's gift.
exercituale: a heriot.
exfrediare: to break the peace.
exhibere: to provide food and lodging for, to entertain.
exhibitio: entertainment; provision.
exigenda: a writ of exigent.
exigendarius: an exigenter, an officer of the Court of Common Pleas.
exigendis, in: in exigent.
exilium: waste, ruin.
eximperatrix: late empress.
exire: to issue.
exitus: issue, in all senses, family, result, expenditure; entrails.
exkippare, exkiupare: to equip; to embark.
exlegalitus: outlawed.
exlegare: to outlaw.
exonium. See essonia.
exorcista: an exorcist, a benett, one of the lesser orders of the church.
exordinare: to degrade.
expedatus, expedicatus: having the feet cut off; hambled, lawed.
expediencia: management.
expeditamentum: hambling.
expeditare: to hamble, hamel or law a dog, i.e., to cut out the ball of the foot or three claws; to root up trees.
expeditio: the obligation of accompanying the lord to war.
expedores: outriders.
52

