attagiare: to attach.
attaincta, attincta: attaint, a writ against a jury for giving a false verdict.
attamiare, attaminare: to broach.
attaxare: to assess.
attegia: a little house.
atterminare: to put withing certain boundaries; to postpone to a certain day; to atterm.
athagiare. See attachiare.
attilamentum. See atilium.
attiliaria: military engines; artillery.
attilliamentum. See atilium.
attilliator: a maker of artillery or military engines.
attilium. See atilium.
attincta: attaint.
attinctare: to attaint.
attinctus: attainted.
attirare: to equip.
attornamentum: an acknowledgement by a tenant of a new lord, attornment.
attornare: to assign goods to some special use; to appoint an attorney; to pack (?).
attornata: a commission.
attornatus: an attorney.
attractorium: a train; a trace.
attractus: carriage by dragging, draught; store.
atturnare, &c. See attornare, &c.
aubergellum: a habergeon, a tunic of mail.
aubobulcus: an oxherd.
auca: a goose; some article of plate, perhaps an ewer; an enclosed piece of land.
aucipiter: a falcon.
auctenticare: to declare authentic.
auctionarius, auctionator: a retailer; a broker.
aucubaculare: to catch birds after dark, to batfowl.
aucula: a gosling.
aucuntacio: used for augmentatio.
aucupia: game.
auditor: a catechumen; an examiner of accounts.
augea: a cistern.
aula: a court baron; the nave of a church.
auleum: a hanging, tapestry.
aunciatus: antiquated.
auncinium: an afternoon meal.
auracio: gilding.
aurare: to gild.
aureolus: a golden oriole (oriolus galbula), or goldfinch (fringilla carduelis).
auricalcum: latten.
auriculare: a cushion; a defence for the ears of a horse.
auricularis digitus: the little finger.
auricularius: a secretary.
aurifex: a goldsmith.
aurificium: goldsmith's work.
aurifilum: gold thread.
aurifragium. See aurifrigium.
aurifraser, aurifresarius: an embroiderer.
aurifriatus, aurifrigiatus: having an orphrey.
aurifrigium, aurifresium, aurifrisium, aurifrixium: an orphrey, golden embroidery on clerical vestments.
aurisia: blindness (Gk. aorisia).
auroca, aurocus: a haycock, a hayrick; the quantity of hay which can be lifted on a handle of a scythe.
aurus. See averus.
austur, austurcus: a goshawk (astur palumbarius. Fr. autour).
austurcharius: a falconer.
ausungius: fat.
autela: a horse's breastplate or poitrel, probably an error for antela.
13

