assaltus: an assault.
assartare: to bring forest land into cultivation by grubbing up the roots, &c.
assartum: assart, land brought into cultivation.
assaturis: a gridiron.
assaysiare (of judges): to call others to assist them.
assecurare: to make secure by pledge or oath; to assure.
assedare. See assidare.
assemblare: to assemble.
assemblata, assemblatio: an assembly.
asseratus: wainscotted.
asserrum: steel.
assessare: to assess; to fine.
assessio: assessment.
assessor: an assessor.
asseurare. See assecurare.
asseware, assewiare: to drain marsh ground.
assidare, assidere: to tax equally; to assess.
assidella: a table dormant.
assidiare: to besiege; to attack.
assignare: to transfer a right; to appoint a deputy; to declare; to pledge.
assignare se ad: to attack; to lay hands on.
assignatio: assignment; transference of interest.
assignatus: an assignee; a deputy.
assimulare: to put together; to collect.
assisa: a fixed measure; a tax or fine; a sitting of justices to hear causes; a jury; certain statutes and writs are also
called assisae.
assisa panis et cerevisiae: the power of examining the weight and measure of bread and beer.
assisores: assessors.
assisus: rented or farmed out.
assisus redditus, redditus assisae: rent of assize; fixed rent.
assoniare: to essoin.
assueare: to drain.
assuera: a drain.
assultus: an assault.
assumare: to kill.
assumptio: the anniversary of the death of a saint.
assurantia: assurance.
assurare: to assure.
astela: a staff.
astrarius haeres: an heir who occupies his inheritance during his ancestor's life.
astrium: a hearth; a house.
astructus: instructed.
astrum. See astrium.
astula: a piece of firewood.
astur. See austur.
asura: azure.
aszeisia. See azesia.
atachiare, &c. See attachiare.
athia, atia: hatred, malice.
atilium, atillium: a utensil; an implement; gear; the rigging of a ship.
atinctus. See attinctus.
atirare: to equip.
atratus: a mourner.
atriamentum: a courtyard.
attachare: to affix.
attachiamentum: attachment; apprehension of a person or seizing goods; articles seized with a criminal,
showing his guilt; right of using (underwood, water, &c.).
attachiamentum forestae: the lower court of a forest.
attachiare: to take in pursuance of a writ; to attach.
attachiator: an officer who makes attachment; a bailiff.
12

