inservire: to bring into slavery.
insigillare: to seal.
insigne: a coat of arms.
insilium: bad advice.
insolercia: unskilfulness.
insolutus: unpaid.
installare: to instal: to quit-claim, to compound.
installatio: a composition.
instauramentum. See instauratio.
instaurare: to stock (a farm).
instaurarius: a stockkeeper.
instauratio, instaurum: store; stock of a farm; furniture of a church, books, vestments, &c.
instirpare: to plant, to establish.
instita: a rochet.
institutio: institution, the granting by a bishop to a clerk of the cure of souls in his benefice.
instuffare: to stuff.
instructus: furniture; tools.
insubulus: a trendle.
insuetus: accustomed. For assuetus.
insula: a detached house or block of buildings; an aisle.
insularius: a keeper or porter of a detached house (insula).
intabulare: to write on tables; to register.
intachgara: a gore of land newly enclosed.
intassare: to heap up hay in cocks.
intendentia: submission.
interceptio: enterprise, aggression.
intercipere: to attack; to seize wrongfully.
interclaustrum: a walk or passage between cloisters (?).
interclausum: an enclosure.
interclausura: the setting of precious stones; chasing of metal.
interclusorius: enclosing.
interclusum. See interclausum.
intercommunicare: to intercommon, where the tenants of two manors use the commons of both.
interesse: interest.
interessens: being present at.
interessentia: interest; fee to those performing divine service.
interfinium: a space; the bridge of the nose.
interlinearis: between the lines.
interlocutorius: conversational.
interloingnium. See loingium.
interludium: play, mumming, as at Christmas.
intermedium: intercession.
internamentum: burial.
interpeditatus: not completely hambled. See expeditare.
interplacitare: to interplead.
interprisa: an attack.
interpugnare: to fight together.
interranea: the bowels.
intersignum: a token; a countersign.
intertenere: to entertain.
intertiare: to sequester.
intestinum opus: wainscot.
inthronizare: to enthrone.
intitulare: to enter in a book or list; to write titles on books; to entitle.
intorcinium: a torch.
intrare: to enter, or inn, i.e. drain and cultivate, marshes, which are then called innings.
intrastagnum: a seat in a row, a stall (?).
intrinsecus: a dweller within, a citizen, opp. to forinsecus.
introducere: to marry.
introitus: an introit, an antiphone sung while the priest is going to the altar.
75

