praepositus: a provost; a constable or reeve; a warden (of a church); a bailiff; the prior of a Benedictine Abbey.
praerogativa: prerogative.
praesellum: a saddle bow.
praesentare: to present.
praesentia: a present, a gift.
praesentialiter: immediately; in presence of; as a gift.
praestare: to let.
praestitum: an advance of money.
praesul: a chief; a bishop; an abbot; a judge.
praesulatus: a bishopric; an abbacy.
prama: a prame, i.e., a barge or lighter.
pramo: a bargee.
precaria, precarium: a request by a lord to his tenant for aid or tax; extra service performed by tenants in
ploughing and harvest, boonday, benewerk. See bedrepium.
precentaria: precentorship.
precentor: a precentor, a chanter.
precipitaria: a battering ram.
precis. See precaria.
preciunt: they cost.
preco: a crier.
precula: a rosary.
premorium: a primer.
prenticius: an apprentice.
prenum: a press for wine, &c.
prephatia: used for praefatio.
presbyter: a priest.
presbyteragium: the income of a parish priest.
presbyteratus: priesthood.
presbyterium: priesthood; a presbytery; the choir of a church.
presentum: a present, a gift.
primitiare: to begin.
princeps: a prince.
principalium: an heirloom; a mortuary.
principatus: principality.
principissa: a princess.
principium burgi: a town hall.
prior: a monastic officer, next to the abbot in an abbey, head of a priory.
prioratus: a priory.
priorissa: a prioress.
prisa: a prize; booty; a fine; prisage.
prisagium: prisage, a share of prizes; a right of taking prizes; a duty on wine and provisions.
prisalia: reprisals.
prisia: prisage.
prisa: a prisoner of war; a prison; imprisonment.
prisona: a prison.
prisonare: to keep in prison.
prisonarius: a prisoner.
privatus: privy.
privicarnium: fasting; Lent.
privilegiare: to grant a privilege to.
proaula: a porch.
probare: used for propriare.
probaticus: connected with sheep.
probator: an accuser; an approver.
probatum: a sheep.
probi homines: good men, an elected body of citizens forming a common council.
proceres: ornamental heads of beams on house fronts.
Processio: Rogation week.
processionale: a book containing directions for and music to be used in processions, the service for gangdays,
litanies, or intercessions.
106

