summagiare: to carry loads.
summagiatio: carrying loads.
summagium: a horse-load, a soam; obligation to supply pack-horses; toll for horses.
summarius: a pack-horse, a sumpter horse.
summata: a load.
summetarius: a man in charge of pack-horses.
summista: a compiler of a summa or abstract.
summitas: the top of a hill.
summonere: to summon.
summonitio: summons.
summonitor: a summoner.
summus: a soam. See summa.
suparum: a linen sleeve; a shirt.
superaedificium: an upper building.
superaltare: a portable altar; the shelf at the back of an altar.
superannuatus: more than a year old.
superaudire: to overhear.
superculum: a coverlet.
superdemanda: excess of claim.
superdicere: to accuse.
superexceptus: despised.
superfactum: profit.
superfidere: to trust too much.
superfossorium: a drawbridge.
superfrontale: a superfrontal, a cloth hanging above a frontal.
supergabulum: overgavel.
superhidagium: superhidage, the extra rate per acre imposed upon a hide of small extent.
superlabium: the upper lip.
superonerare: to overload.
superpellicium: a surplice.
superplus, superplusagium: a surplus; the amount which a sheriff or other officer has spent beyond his
receipts.
superprisia: seizure by surprise.
superseminatus: measled (of pork).
supersisa: sursise, penalty for neglect, esp. for not paying castle-ward at Dover.
supertenere: to hold over; to neglect.
supertunica: a garment worn over a tunic.
supervidere: to survey, to examine.
supervincere: to conquer.
supervisor: a surveyor; an overseer.
supervisus: survey.
supparum. See suparum.
suppeditare: to trample on.
suppositio: a support; a prop; a hypothesis.
supprior. See subprior.
suppriserunt: they surprised.
supprisia: used for superprisia.
supra: before, in a reference in a book. This meaning and the corresponding meaning of infra and inferius were
originally used for a roll.
supravisor: an overseer.
sura: a coarse loaf.
surigicus: a surgeon (chirurgicus).
surplusagium. See superplus.
surrejunctio: a surrejoinder.
surrogatus: a surrogate, one appointed in the room of another.
sursa: a spring, a fountain.
sursumreddere: to surrender.
sursumredditio: a surrender.
susanus: worn out.
susceptor: an undertaker.
128

