mansum, mansura, mansus. See mansa.
mantea: a mantle.
mantellum: a cloak; a mantlet.
mantiare: to fit a handle to.
mantica: a wallet.
mantile: a long robe.
mantum: a cloak, a mantle.
manuale: a manual, a book containing what is necessary for the administration of sacraments and sacramentals.
manualis obedientia: sworn obedience.
manubriator: a maker of hilts or handles, a hafter, a helver.
manucapere: to mainprise, to become mainpernor for.
manucaptio: mainprise, surety.
manucaptor: a mainpernor, bail.
manulevare: to raise (money).
manumola, manumula: a handmill.
manuopera: stolen goods taken on a thief; cattle and farm implements; handwork.
manuoperarius: a handicraftsman.
manupastus: a domestic servant; domestic service.
manupes: a foot in length.
manupositum: a deposit; an earnest.
manurare: to manure.
manus: used for an oath.
manusmola: a handmill.
manus mortua: mortmain.
manutenentia: maintenance; the unlawful upholding of a person or cause.
manutenere: to maintain.
manutensionis pileum: a cap of maintenance.
manutentor: a maintainor. See manutenentia.
manutentum: a handle.
manutergium: a handwipe, a towel.
manzer: a bastard.
mapparius: a keeper of linen.
mara: a lake, a mere; a moor.
marabotinus: a gold coin used by the Arabs in Spain; an account temp. Hen. III states "marabotinus seu
talentum." In later times it appears to mean a maravedi.
marca: a mark, a silver coin, 8 oz. troy weight, in money 13s. 4d.
marca auri: in 1130 was worth 6l.; in Stephen's reign, 9 silver marks; in the reign of Henry II, 12l.; in John's
reign, 10 silver marks.
marcanda villa: a market town.
marcapetum: a footstool.
marcarda villa: a market town.
marcare: to mark; to take by right of letters of marque.
marcata: a rent of a mark.
marcator: a merchant.
marcatum: a market. See mercatum.
marcatus: a rent of a mark.
marcha. See marca.
marchalsia: the Marshalsea, a prison in London.
marchantesia: merchandise.
mercheium: a market.
marchesia: the March; the Court of the March.
marcheta. See merchetum.
marchetum: a market.
marchia: the March or border land between two countries.
marchiare: to adjoin, to border on.
marchiatus: a marquis.
marchio: a marcher; a marquis.
marchionatus: a marquisate.
marchionissa: a marchioness.
marchisus, marchisius: a marcher, a dweller on a March.
85

