communis clericus: common clerk, or clerk of the commons, now called town clerk.
communis pasture: common of pasture.
communitas: commonalty; sometimes all the citizens, but in this case usually communitas civium.
communitas civitatis: the commonalty of the city, the court or council.
comortha: a collection, especially that made at marriages, and when a priest said his first mass.
comothus. See commothum.
compagator: a suffragan bishop.
companagium: anything eaten with bread; the right of having meals together.
comparticeps, compartionarius: a copartner.
compassare: to compass.
compater: a godfather.
compausare: to cease, to rest.
compellare: to cite; to accuse; to compel.
compellativus: an accuser.
compertorium: a judicial inquest in the civil law made by delegates.
compestralis. See campestralis.
compestratus. See campestratus.
complectorium, completorium: compline, about 7 p.m.; supper.
complicatorium: a counting board, a counter.
compostiare: to manure.
compostum: manure.
compotus: an account.
comptista: an accountant.
compurgator: one who swears to another's innocence.
computatorium: a counter, a reckoning board; the Counter, the name of two prisons in the Poultry and Wood
Street.
computoria: a counting-house.
computorium. See computatorium.
computorum rotulator: a comptroller.
computus: an account.
conalis murus: a gable wall.
concelamentum: concealment.
concelare: to conceal.
concelatio: concealment.
concelator: a concealer, a man who finds out concealed lands.
concernere: to belong; to concern.
concides: felled trees.
conclave: a parlour.
concubiculum, concubile: a bed for two.
condare: to give at the same time.
condictum: a mandate, an edict; a tribunal, a court.
condigena: a fellow-countryman.
condorsum: a ridge or low hill (?).
conductarius: a man employed on water works.
conductus: a conduit.
conductus, salvus: a safe-conduct.
condulus: a buzzard (buteo vulgaris).
conduus: a pear tree, esp. Quarendon.
conestabulus, conestabilis: a constable.
confinium: a boundary.
confiscare: to confiscate.
confortamen: comfort.
confraga: breaking down trees.
confratria: brotherhood; conspiracy.
confrustare, confrustrare: to break in pieces.
congius: a measure containing about a gallon and a pint.
congrua, congrus: a conger (conger vulgaris).
coninga: a rabit; a rabbit skin.
coningeria: a rabbit warren.
conjecturare: to guess.
36

