incluvium: some instrument of torture.
incombrancia: encumbrance.
incombrare: to hinder; to stop up a road; to pawn.
incompatibilitas: incompatibility, of benefices which cannot be held together.
incopare: to accuse.
incopolitus: a proctor; a vicar.
incordare: to string a bow or crossbow.
incortinare: to adorn with hangings.
incrastinum: the morrow.
incredens: infidel.
incrocamentum: encroachment.
incrocare, incrochiare: to encroach.
incrustator: a tinker.
inculpare: to blame; to accuse.
inculpatio: blame; accusation.
incumbrare. See incombrare.
incurramentum: liability to a penalty.
incurrimentum: a fine.
incussa. For inconcussa.
incussorium: a hammer.
incustodia: carelessness.
indago: a park.
indebitatus: indebted.
indecimabilis: not liable to tithes.
indefensus: one who refuses to answer to an accusation.
indefesibilis: indefeasible, that which cannot be made void.
indempnis. For indemnis.
indentare: to indent.
indentura: an indenture.
index: a pointer or setter dog.
indicibilis: unspeakable.
indictamentum: an indictment.
indictare: to indict.
indictio: indictment; indiction, a cycle of fifteen years by which writings were dated at Rome.
indictor: an accuser.
indistanter: immediately.
indistringibilis: not distrainable.
indivisibilis murus: a main wall, not a party wall.
indivisum: held in common.
indorsamentum: endorsement.
indorsare: to endorse.
indorsatio: endorsement.
indossare. See indorsare.
inductio: induction, putting a clergyman into possession of his church.
indula: strong thread.
indus: indigo.
inedicibilis: unspeakable.
inewardus: a watchman.
infaidare: to be at enmity with.
infalistatio: a capital punishment inflicted at Dover, drowning (?).
infeodare: to enfeoff.
infeodatio decimarum: granting tithes to laymen.
infeofare: to enfeoff.
inferius: lower down, in a roll; further on, in a book.
infirmaria: the infirmary of a monastery. O.E. fermory, farmery.
infirmarius: the guardian of the sick in a monastery.
infirmatorium: an infirmary.
infiscare: to confiscate.
inflechiare: to make shafts for arrows or bolts.
inforciare: to fortify.
73

