porticulus: a truncheon.
porticus: an apse or porch, not a peristyle as in classical Latin.
portiforium: a breviary.
portimotus. See portmota.
portionarius: a joint holder of a benefice.
portmota: a portmote, a court held in towns.
porus: a pore.
positio: an impost; a tax.
posse (subst.): power.
possessionatus: in possession of.
posta: a station; a post.
postarum, magister: Master of the Post.
postdisseisina: postdisseisin.
postela: a crupper.
postergare: to leave behind, to abandon.
posterna: a postern gate.
posterula, posticum: a postern gate.
postilla: a homily.
postillare: to interpret, to comment on.
postorellus: a name given to robbers in Gascony, temp. Edw. II.
postsellium: the hinder part of a saddle.
postulare: to transfer a man in possession of or elect of an episcopal see, to another.
potagium: pottage; a tax on drink.
potata: a pot or pottle.
potellum: a pottle, two quarts.
poteria: pottery; a pottery.
potestas: a king, chief ruler, or magistrate.
poticarius. For apothecarius.
potionare: to poison.
potissare: to sip.
pottarius: a potter.
pottata: a pot or pottle.
pottus: a pot.
potura: pasture; drink.
poudratus: powdered; salted.
poutura. See potura.
powenatius: a garment of cloth.
practisare, practizare: to practise.
praebenda: commons; a prebend; provender.
praebendarius: a prebendary.
praeceptor: an officer of the knights of the Temple.
praecantare: to sing beforehand.
praeceptoria: the benefice assigned to the office of praeceptor.
praecessor: vanguard.
praecipitaria: a battering ram.
praeconia: superiority; fame.
praeconisare: to foresee; to foretell; to proclaim.
praeconsa: some vestment.
praecontestis: a previous fellow-witness.
praefectus: a mayor.
praeferentia: preference; the right of receiving firstfruits.
praeferrementum: a prerogative; a privilege.
praelata: an abbess.
praelatia: ecclesiastical dignity.
praelatus: a magistrate; a bishop; an abbot or abbess; a prior or prioress.
praelibare: to mention before.
praemasticare: to discuss beforehand.
praemiabilis: deserving of reward.
praemunire: to cite (for praemonere).
praepositura: a reeveship, constableship; a district under the jurisdiction of such an officer.
105

