petulus: with white feet.
peytrellum: a poitrel.
phalesia: a cliff on the seashore.
phano: a banner.
pheliparius: a fripperer.
phila: a file.
philaterium, philaternum: a phylactery; an amulet; a reliquary, worn suspended from the neck.
philipparius: a fripperer.
phoracra. See foracra.
pica: an index, pyebook; rules for saying divine service; a peck.
picagium, piccagium: payment to the owner of the soil for breaking ground to erect booths, &c.
picesium: a pickaxe.
picheria: a pitcher.
picherius: a fish, perhaps pilchard (clupea pilchardus), but more probably the gilthead (chrysophrys or sparus
aurata), called in Old French picarel, O.E. cackerell.
pichoisium, picoisum: a pickaxe.
pictaciare: to mend, to patch.
pictaciarius: a cobbler.
pictacio: painting.
pictare: to paint.
pictellum: a pightell, or picle, a small piece of land, enclosed with a hedge.
picturare: to paint.
picula: pickle.
pietancia: a pittance, an addition to the usual food in collegiate churches or convents; the pittance for two was
given on one plate.
pietanciaria: the place where pittance is distributed; the office of the pittancer.
pietantiarius: a pittancer, an officer who distributes the pittance.
piga: the forearm.
pightellum. See pictellum.
pikerellus: a pickerel, a small pike.
pila: a pile (heraldic); the reverse of a coin.
pilare: to drive piles.
pilarius: a pillar.
pilatus: a blunt arrow, bolt, or quarel.
pileo: a hatter, a capper (?).
pilettus: an arrow with a knob at the head.
pillare: to plunder.
pillaria: plunder; devastation.
pilleus: for pileus, a hat.
pillorium, piloria, pilorium: a pillory.
pilum: cloth.
pilus: a stake.
pinaculum: a pinnacle.
pinca: a jug; a bodkin; a granary.
pincella: a pencil.
pincerna: a butler; a cupbearer.
pincernaria: a buttery; the office of butler.
pincernarius: an officer of the buttery.
pinnare: to notch; to cut niches.
pinsa: a pestle.
pinsella: a brake or braye, a kneading machine.
pinsis: a grimace.
pipa: the great or pipe roll of the Exchequer; a pipe of wine, two hogsheads.
piperarius: a pepperer.
pipum: a pipe of wine.
pira: an arch of a bridge.
piratum, piretum: perry.
piritegium: curfew.
pisa: a wey. See waga.
pisaria: a stock of peas.
102

