dapsilitas: an act of liberality.
dardus: a dart.
darsis: some kind of fish.
data: the date of a document.
datarius: a datary, an officer of the Roman chancery.
datilis, dattilus: a date (fruit).
datium: tribute; tax.
dauberium: plaster work, dab.
davata: a "daywercke," or four perches.
daya: a dairyman, or maid.
dayaria, dayeria: a dairy.
dayla. See daila.
deadvocare: to disavow; to refuse; to give up a suit.
deafforestare: to disafforest, to bring forest land into cultivation.
dealbare: to whiten.
dealbatio: a white dress worn by a candidate or novice.
dealbator: a whitewasher, dauber.
deambulatorium: an ambulatory.
dearestare: to free from arrest.
deawarennare: to dis-warren.
debata, debatum: a debate, a dispute.
debatabilis: debateable.
debere: sometimes means "is supposed to."
debilis: worn.
debitatus: indebted.
debriare: to intoxicate; to inundate.
debriatus: drunk.
decaisatus: decayed.
decalcare: to whiten.
decanatus: a deanery.
decania, decenna: a deanery; a tithing; a friburgh.
decanica: an ecclesiastical prison.
decanus: a dean; a borsholder, chief of the friburgh; a dozenner, a tithing man.
decarnellatus: having the crenellation destroyed.
decasus: decay.
decaudare: to dock the tail.
decena. See decania.
decendium: a period of ten days.
decenna: a tithing.
decennaria: the jurisdiction of a tithing-man.
decennarius: a tithing-man, a dozenner.
decimabilis: titheable.
decimae: tithes.
decimare: to tithe.
decimatio: tithes; paying a tenth part.
decimus primus: eleventh.
decipula: a trap, a snare.
decius: a die.
decolpare: to cut down.
decostare, decosticere: to cost.
decretales: decretals, papal letters containing decrees, or on matters in which the popes were consulted.
decretista: a person learned in the Decretals.
decretum: a decree, especially of the pope.
decrustare: to strip off.
decuria: a tithing.
decuriare: to bring into order; to try (?).
decurio: a rural dean; a tithing-man.
dedilectio: loss of affection.
deductus: game; hunt.
defalcare: to weaken; to deduct.
43

