cepes: a hedge (sepes).
cephalia: headache.
cephalus: a blockhead.
ceppa: stocks.
ceppagium: the stump of a tree.
ceppus: a stamp.
cepum: tallow (cebum).
ceragium: waxscot, payment for the supply of candles in a church.
cercella: a teal (anas crecca. Fr. sarcelle).
cerchia: a search.
ceresum: a cherry.
cerevisia, cervisia: beer.
cerisum: a cherry.
cerna: choice; sort.
ceroferarius: a candle bearer, an acolyte.
ceroteca: a glove (chiroteca).
certificare, certiorare, certorare: to certify, to inform.
certitudinaliter: certainly.
certum letae: cert money, paid yearly by the tenants of some manors to the lord.
cerura: a mound or fence; a lock.
cerussa: white lead.
cerverettus, cervericeus, cerveritius, canis: a staghound.
cervicale: a bolster.
cervisiarius, cervisior: a brewer; a tenant who pays rent in beer.
cespitare: to stumble.
chacea: a chace; the right of hunting; a right of way for cattle, droveway.
chaceare: to hunt.
chaceatus: chased (of plate).
chacepollus. See cacepollus.
chacia: a countertally.
chacurus: a horse or hound for hunting.
chalendra. See chelindra.
chalo: a scapulary; a counterpane, a chalon.
chamberlaria: the office of chamberlain.
champertor. See campiparticeps.
chamus: a horse's bit; a headstall.
charactare, charaxare: to write.
charnarium: a charnel-house; a cemetery.
charreya: a cartload.
charta: paper; a charter.
charta partita: a charter-party.
chartare: to convey by charter.
chartula: a small charter.
chartulare: a cartulary, a register of charters.
chasor: a horse for hunting.
chatia zabuli: silting up with sand.
chaudmella: chaudmedley, much the same as chance medley.
chauma: reeds or sedge.
cheldrum: a chaldron or chaldern, 36 bushels.
chelindra: a flat boat.
cheminagium: cheminage, chiminage; a toll paid for a road through a forest.
cheminata: a chimney.
cheminus: a road; the right of carting crops through another's land.
chepingabulum: tax paid at market.
cherechsectum: church scot.
cheresettum: church scot.
cherigmannus: one whose duty it was to inspect and fix the boundaries of a manor.
cherisetum, chersettum: church scot.
cheruca: a vane, a weathercock.
cheva: a shive, the bung in which the vent peg was placed.
31

