judaismus: Jewry.
judicator: a doomsman, a man called in to assist a Court in difficult cases, esp. in Cheshire.
jugulare: to yoke.
juguliettum: the neck.
jugum: a yoke of land, half a plough-land.
juisa, juisium: judgment; trial by ordeal or battle; execution; pillory.
jumentarius: a man in charge of mares.
jumentum: a mare.
juncare: to strew rushes.
juncata: cream cheese.
juncta: a joint.
junctum: a measure of salt.
junctura: jointure.
jupa: a petticoat; a gown open in front. O.E., a chymmer.
jupellum: a coat, a frock; a kind of banner.
jurata, juratio: a jury; a body of jurates.
jurator: a juror.
juratus: a jurate; a person in Bordeaux, Bayonne, and other French towns, equivalent to an alderman in
England; also in Maidstone for a time in the 17th century aldermen were called jurates.
jurista: a lawyer.
jurnale: a diary. See jornata.
jurnedum: a day's journey.
justa, justea: a joust, a tournament; a flagon.
justicia: jurisdiction; a fine; right, due; a justiciary or justice; a joust.
justiciabilis: under jurisdiction.
justiciare: to bring to trial; to exercise or administer justice; to compel, to punish.
justiciare se: to appear or plead before a justice.
justiciaria: the office of justice or justiciary; a writ to justices; the day when they sit.
justiciarius: a justice.
justificare: to bring to trial.
justificator: a compurgator.
justitiaria. See justiciaria.
justitium: cessation from the exercise of justice.
justorium: a mill clapper.
juttare: to jut out.
K.
kaia, kaium: a quay; a wharf.
kaiagium: toll paid for unloading goods at a wharf; quayage.
kalendae, &c. See calendae.
kaneva: canvas.
kanevacius: with canvas mail. "Mail" is the word used for the plumage of a hawk over a year old.
karetta: a cart.
karisma: grace.
karistia: dearth.
karrata: a cartload.
karula: a carrel, a small square chamber or cell, sometimes found in cloisters.
karvana: a caravan.
karvannum: a baggage train.
katallum. See catallum.
kauma: thatch.
kayus, kaya: a quay; a wharf.
kebbatus multo: a worthless sheep, a kebber.
kembelina: a kemeling, or keeler, a tub.
kemmotus: a cymwd or comot, the quarter of a cantref. See cantreda.
kernellare: to embattle, to crenellate.
kernellum: a battlement; a pinnacle.
keveronus. See cheveringus.
77

