agerarius: a farmer's dog.
aggreare se: to agree.
agillarius: a hayward or herdward; a keeper of cattle on a common.
agisamentum: a masquerade.
agistamentum: right of pasturage; the sum paid for this right; assignment of it.
agistare: to assign pasturage for cattle, esp. in a forest.
agistatae terrae: lands whose owners are bound to keep up sea walls.
agistator: an agister or gyst taker, an officer who assigns the pasturage in a forest.
agistiamentum. See agistamentum.
agitatio animalium in foresta: the drift or view of beasts in the forest.
agna: a gold coin, 14th cent.
agnatio: lambing.
agnellatio, agnilatio: lambing.
Agnus Dei: an oval piece of white wax, stamped with the figure of a lamb, and consecrated.
agontea: a champion (agonista).
agreamentum: agreement.
agreare se: to agree.
agredula: a titmouse.
agri: arable land in the common fields.
aimellatus: enamelled.
ainescia: the right of the eldest. See esnecia.
aira: an eyrie, the nest of an eagle, a falcon, or a swan.
aisiamentum, aisimentum: liberty of passage; easement.
aisnecca: a ship. (A.S. snace.)
aisya: convenience.
akermannus: a small farmer. (A.S. aecer mon.) Their holding was less than that of the virgatarii, but from
comparison of rent must have been more than an acre.
aketonum: a haqueton, a gambeson, a padded or quilted tunic.
ala: the aisle of a church.
alabastarius: a crossbowman (arcubalistarius).
alabrum: a reel.
alamandina: a stone coloured like a garnet.
alanerarius: a keeper of dogs (alans) or hawks (lanners).
alanus: a large hound.
alatera, alatoria, alatorium, alatura: a covered way or walk; a piazza.
alaudarius: a hobby hawk (falco subbuteo).
alba: an alb, a long white tight-sleeved vestment; dawn.
alba firma: a yearly rent payable to the chief lord of the hundred in white money, i.e. silver; white rent, blanch
farm.
Albae: the weeks after Easter and Whitsuntide.
albatorium: southernwood.
albergata: the right of lodging in a vassal's house; money paid in lieu thereof.
albergellum, albergio: a habergeon, a tunic of mail shorter than a hauberk.
albesteria: a loophole for shooting through.
albesterius: a crossbowman.
albinus: a foreigner. (O.E. a comeling.)
alblasta: a crossbow (arcubalista).
alblastarius: a crossbowman. See arcubalistarius.
aldermannus: an alderman.
aldermanria: a district under the jurisdiction of an alderman.
alea: a passage, an alley.
alebrodium: a warm drink; broth; caudle.
alecenarium: a lanner (falco lanarius).
alecia (sing.): herrings (clupea harengus).
alecium, alectum: a herring, herrings. On the Continent the word included sardines and anchovies, but probably
not in England.
aleium: alloy.
aleptes: a chamberlain.
alficus: a leper.
alfinus: a bishop, at chess.
5

