bassaria camera: a base chamber.
basselardus. See basilardum.
bassellus: a coin abolished by king Henry II.
bassum: a pack saddle.
bassus: low.
bastardia: bastardy.
bastardus: one born out of wedlock.
bastida, bastita: a castle, a word used especially in Southern France.
basto: a staff.
bastonicum: close custody.
basum. Per basum tolnetum capere, to take toll by strike.
batalia: battle.
batella, batellus: a small boat.
batellagium: boat-hire.
batellarius: a boatman; a bateller, the lowest order in Oriel College.
batellatus: embattled.
batellus: a boat. See batillus.
bateria: battery, beating.
batilda: toll for boats (?).
batillagium: carriage by boat; boat-hire.
batillare: to send by boat.
batillus: a bat; a beetle; a clapper; a boat.
batitoria: a fulling mill.
batium. See bacium.
bativa, batura: battery.
batleuga. See banleuga.
batus: a boat; a measure, 12 and a half gallons; a peck; a vessel used in feeding horses; a bat.
baubare: to bark; to bay.
baubella: jewels.
bauca: a bason.
baucaria: a tapster.
baudekinum. See baldekinum.
bausanus: a badger, a bawson.
bausia, bosia: treason, felony.
bausiare, bosiare: to rebel.
bauzanus: piebald (Fr. baucant, bauzant.)
baya. See baia.
bazantius. See bisantius.
bazeyna: basil, prepared leather.
bechare: to dig; to use a pickaxe.
becnus: some sort of fish.
beconagium: contribution for the maintenance of beacons.
bedelaria: the office of beadle, or district to which his office extends; bedellary.
bedellus: a beadle, or bedell.
bederipa. See bedrepium.
bedrepium: bedripe, harvest work done by tenants as a customary service; it sometimes means a definite
amount, perhaps a day's work.
bedripus. See bedrepium.
bedum: the portion of a millstream which turns the wheel and is boarded up to increase the force of water.
belfredus: a belfry.
belgiga: a car, a chariot.
bellicrepa: a muster.
belligerare: to make war.
bellum: a battle; used, as the English word is, to denote a portion of an army; a judicial combat, duel.
benda: a band, either metal or stuff; a bar; a bend (heraldic).
beneficiare: to confer a benefice on; to enfeoff.
beneficium: a benefice, an ecclesiastical living or promotion.
benevolentia: a voluntary gratuity given by subjects to the king.
benwrda: benerthe, service with plough and cart.
beodum: a table.
17

