apparator: a messenger who serves the process of a spiritual court, an apparitor.
apparella: items of miscellaneous excess beyond current regulated expenditure. (Middle Temple.)
apparens lex: ordeal.
apparentia: appearance.
appares: equals.
apparura: furniture; equipment.
appatizare. See apatisare.
appellare: to appeal.
appellum: an appeal.
appendens: a thing of inheritance, belonging to a greater inheritance.
appenditia: appendages; appurtenances.
appendium: a reel.
appendix, appendicium: a pentice, a penthouse.
appennagium. See apanagium.
appensamentum: delay; postponement.
appensura: payment of money by weight.
appenticium: a pentice, a penthouse.
applauda: sauce.
applicium: an inn; lodging.
applita: harness; fittings.
appodiare: to prop up; to sustain.
appoisonare: to poison.
apponere: to pledge; to pawn.
apporia, apporria. See aporia.
apportionamentum: apportionment.
apportionare: to divide proportionally.
apportum: revenue or profit; corrody or pension; rent or tribute.
appreciare: to appraise.
apprendicius: an apprentice.
apprentisagium, apprenticiamentum: apprenticeship.
approbare: to augment the vaule of, as to increase the rent of land.
approbator: a person who confesses felony and accuses others, an approver.
appropriare: to annex a benefice to the use of a spiritual corporation or person; to appropriate.
appropriatio, appropriamentum: appropriation.
approvamentum: profits; crop.
approviare, approware, appruare se: to use for one's own profit, as to enclose waste land.
appruator: an officer in some towns (e.g. Wakefield) appointed to look after the interests of the lord of the
manor.
appruntare: to borrow.
appunctuare: to appoint.
aprisa, aprisia: an inquisition, information.
aquagium: a watercourse; a holy water stoup.
aqualitium: a gutter.
aqualium: the top of the head.
aquare: to water.
aquarium: a ewer.
aquebachelus: a holy water clerk.
aquestus: acquisition.
arabilis: a maple tree.
aracium: a stud of horses. See haratium.
aralis: arable.
arallus: a ploughfoot.
aralus: a maple tree.
aratrum terrae: as much land as can be tilled with one plough.
aratum: a charter.
aratus: a day's ploughing.
arbalista, arbalistarius. See arcubalista.
arbalisteria: loopholes.
arcare: to be charged with; to build an arch; to vault.
arcarius: an archer; a keeper of an arca, a chest for the deposit of treasure or deeds.
9

