conjunctorius: a joiner.
conquestare: to acquire, to conquer.
conquestus: property acquired (by inheritance or conquest or otherwise).
conquinare: to defile.
conredium. See corredium.
conscisorium: a guidon, a small standard.
consequentia: a precedent.
considerare: to decree; to award.
consistorium: a council or assembly of ecclesiastical persons, or place of justice in a spiritual court; a seat at
table; a meal.
conspicatio: cleaning.
constabilia: ward.
constabilis: a constable.
constabularia: the office of constable.
constabularius: a constable.
constuma: custom.
consuetudinarius: customary; a custumal, a book containing the rites of divine offices, or the customs of a
monastery; a man subject to feudal services.
consuetudo: custom, used, as the English word, for a payment imposed on merchandise.
consuetura: use.
consulator: a counsel, a councillor, used especially in Guienne.
consultarius: a councillor.
contenementum: freehold land attached to a man's dwelling-house; what is necessary for a man's maintenance.
contentare: to pay; to denote.
conthoralis: husband or wife.
contiguare: to be near.
contra: against, i.e. in time for.
contrabreve: a counter writ.
contrada: a country.
contrafacere: to imitate, to counterfeit.
contrafactor: an imitator, a forger.
contrafactura: a counterfeit.
contraiare: to oppose.
contramandatum: a lawful excuse which a defendant alleges by attorney, to show that the plaintiff has no cause
of complaint.
contramurale: an outwork.
contraplacitum: a counter-plea.
contrapositio: a plea or answer.
contrariare: to oppose.
contrariparius: a corrival, a dweller on the opposite bank; a beater on the opposite side of a river when
hawking.
contrarotulatio: comptrolment.
contrarotulator: a comptroller.
contrarotulum: a counter-roll.
contrata: a country.
contratallia: a counter-tally.
contratalliator: a counter-talleyer.
contrivare: to contrive.
controfacere: to counterfeit.
contus: a pestle.
conus: a corner.
conveancia: conveyance.
conveare: to convey.
conveiancia: a conveyance.
convenire: to summon, to convene.
conventinare: to covenant.
conventio: a covenant.
conventionare: to covenant.
conversus: a lay monk, lay brother; a converted Jew or Mahommedan.
conviator: a fellow traveller.
37

