obaudire: to disregard; also to obey.
obbatus: a jugful.
obediencia: any office in a monastery; a rent.
obedientialis, obedientiarius: an inferior officer in a convent; an advocate of a convent.
obgrunnire: to murmur at.
obiculum: a chace at tennis.
obitus: funeral service, or anniversary of death; obit.
oblata: an offering; a gift; a wafer; the Eucharistic bread. See obolata.
obligar: a garter.
obligatorium: obligation; a bond.
obnoxius: sometimes used for obnixus.
obolata: a halfpenny worth; a measure of land varying from half an acre to half a perch.
obolus: a halfpenny.
obrizus: pure, of metals.
obsella: a coffer (?).
obstaculum: a tribute.
obstinatus: deaf.
obstupare: to stop up.
obstupatio: stopping up.
obturacio: filling up; stopping up.
obulata. See obolata.
obventio: an offering; tithe; profit.
occasio: a tribute on a special occasion; a hindrance; a complaint.
occasionamentum: molestation.
occasionare: to molest.
occasionari: to be liable to some special tribute; to be hindered, vexed.
occatio: assart. See assartum.
octaba, octava: the eighth day after a feast, utas.
ocularium: the visor of a helmet.
oculus: a circular window.
odditorium: a miscellaneous collection; a lumber room.
odorisequus: hunting by scent.
oeconomicus: an administrator of property; an executor.
oeconomus: a treasurer.
ofasium: caudle.
offerenda: an offering; the sacrament of the Eucharist; an antiphone sung at that time.
offertorium: offerings; an offertory; a piece of cloth in which the offerings or the chalice is wrapped. See also
offerenda.
officialis: one who exercises the jurisdiction of a bishop or archdeacon.
officiare: to serve.
officiarius. See officialis.
officiator: an officer.
officium: trade; an office, a room where a man works.
offrum: an offer.
ofnama: an enclosure.
olosa: a shad. See alosa.
olosericum: entirely of silk; bawdekyn.
olyverum ferri: a foundry (?); a heavy hammer worked by a treadle.
omelia: a homily.
omnimodus: of all sorts.
onophorium: a costrel, a wooden bottle.
opella: a shop.
operabile: a handicraft.
operabilis dies: a working-day.
operaria: the office of works.
operarius: a tenant who did bodily work for his lord; a clerk of the works.
operatio: a day's work.
operatus: chased.
94

