horologium: a clock; a watch.
horoscopus: a dial.
horripilatio: shuddering.
hortarius: a gardener.
horula: a short time (dim. of hora).
hosa: a small wooden cask.
hosae: hose.
hosarius: a hosier.
hospitalaria: the hostry or guest-house of a monastery.
hospitalarius: a knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem; a hospitaller or hostillar, a monk whose duty is to
attend to guests, the steward of the guest-house; a guest-master.
hospitale, hospitalitas: an inn; a guest house; a hospital.
hospitare terram: to enclose (?); to build a house on.
hospitarius. See hospitalarius.
hospitator: an innkeeper.
hospitium: a house for receiving guests; an inn, a hostel; an Inn of Court or Chancery; procuration or visitation
money.
hostagium: hostage. See also hospitium and hostelagium.
hostelagium: a lord's right of being lodged by his tenants.
hostelarium. See hospitalaria.
hostellarius: an innkeeper. See also hospitalarius.
hosteria: a ciborium, q.v.
hosterium: a hoe.
hostia: the consecrated wafer.
hostiagius: a hostage.
hostiaratus, hostiaria: the office of usher or doorkeeper, one of the minor orders.
hostiarius: an usher.
hosticius: a porch.
hostilagium. See hostelagium.
hostillaria. See hospitalaria.
hostillarius: an ostler. See hospitalarius.
hostium. For ostium.
hostorcus: a goshawk (astur palumbarius).
hostorium: a strickle for measuring corn.
hostorius: a goshawk.
hostria. See hospitalaria.
hostricus: a goshawk.
huca: a hewke, a frock or mantle.
hucea: housing of a horse; a gown.
huchea: a hutch.
hudagium. See hidagium.
hugia: a hoy; a hutch.
huisserium: a ship for conveying horses.
huisserius: an usher.
hulcus. See hulka.
huldare: to plank, to put campsheathing on a bank.
hulka: a large ship, a transport ship.
hullus: a hill.
hulmus: a holm, a meadow on a river bank, or an island.
humagium: a marshy place; homage.
hummulina: beer.
hundreda. See hundredum.
hundredarius: a hundredor, a juror in a case concerning land who lives in the hundred in which the land is; a
bailiff of a hundred.
hundredum: a hundred, a division of a shire; a hundred court; payment due from a hundred; fine from the
hundredors for non-appearance at the court.
hura: a hure, a coarse cap.
hurarius: a hurrer, a maker of hures.
hurdicius: a hurdle; a military engine to protect the assailants of a fortress; a hoarding.
hurtardus, hurtus: a ram.
70

