adventare: to arrive.
adventura: an adventure, or venture.
adventurare: to adventure, or venture.
adventurarius: an adventurer.
adventus: casual profit.
adversaria: memoranda.
advisamentum: advice; consideration.
advisare: to advise.
advocare: to advow; to vouch; to justify an act done; to avow, i.e. in boroughs, to falsely allege that goods
belong to a freeman so as to evade duty.
advocaria: avowry; the justification of having taken a distress, when the party sues forth a replevin.
advocatia: an advowson.
advocatio: advowson, the right of presentation to an ecclesiastical benefice; allegation of protection or authority.
advocator: a voucher; a pleader.
advocatus: a counsellor or pleader; patron of a church, avowee, advowee, vouchee; protector of a community.
aedituus: a verger, a keeper of relics.
Aegyptiacus, Aegyptius: a gypsy.
aeraria, aeria: an eyry, a nest, usually of hawks.
aerarius: nesting
aereus, aerius: sky blue.
aericius canis. See herecius.
aerrarius. See aerarius.
aesnescia. See esnecia.
affadilla: a daffodil.
affeagium. See affidagium.
afferamentum: affeerment, assessment.
afferare: to assess a fine.
afferator: an affeerer, a person who assesses fines in courts leet and courts baron.
affeteiare: to break or train hounds or hawks.
affeyteiare. See affeteiare.
affidagium: assurance; safety.
affidare: to certify; to swear fealty; to affiance; a term used at the game of tables.
affidatio: an oath.
affidatus, affidus: one who has pledged his faith to another.
affilare: to put on a file with.
affilatorium: a steel, a hone.
affina: a workshop.
affinare: to fine (gold); to finish.
affirmare: to let to farm.
affodillus: a daffodil.
afforare: to appraise.
afforciamentum: a fortress; compulsion; the coercive power of a Court.
afforciare: to increase or make stronger; to compel.
afforciatus: pure, unadulterated. Applied to cloth and other goods.
afforestare: to turn land into forest.
affra. See affrus.
affraia: an affray.
affraiare: to frighten.
affrectamentum, affretamentum: freight.
affrectare, affretare: to freight.
affriare: to frighten.
affrus: an ox or horse for farm work, usually a horse.
affuramentum. See afferamentum.
agalauda: a plover, probably a pewit.
agalma: an image on a seal.
agaseus: a gazehound.
agellarius: a hayward; a herdward.
agellus: a hamlet.
agenda: business; the office of the Mass or other service; a priest's daily office.
agenfrida: a lord or owner.
4

