qualus: a thread, a strainer used in brewing.
quarellus. See quadrellus.
quarentena: quarentine, a space of forty days; Lent; a shot or shute, i.e., a square furlong, a space of 40 perches.
quarrera: a stone quarry.
quarrerius: a stonecutter.
quarruria: a stone quarry.
quarta: a quart.
quartale: a quart.
quartarium: a quarter of corn.
quartarius terrae: eight acres.
quartenarius: suffering from quartan ague.
quarteragium: quarterage, quarterly payment.
quarteria: a quarter of land.
quarterisare: to cut into four quarters.
quarterium: a quarter; a soam of corn.
quarterizatio: quartering, part of the punishment of treason.
quaternum: a quire.
quarteronus: a quarter; a quarter of a hundredweight.
quartilatus: divided into four parts.
quartus: a quart.
quassare: to annul, to quash.
quassillarius: a pedlar.
quaternio, quaternum: a folded sheet of paper (Fr. cahier); a quire.
quaternis, in: in quarto.
quaterno, in: in quarto.
quatriplicare: to quadruple.
quaxillarius: a pedlar.
quentesia: a device.
querela: a party; a faction; a fine.
querquera: ague.
querraria: a quarry.
querulare: to complain.
questa: an inquest or inquisition.
questionarius: a palmer. O.E. "quistron."
quieta clamancia or clamatio: a quitclaim.
quietantia: an acquittance; abandonment; immunity.
quietare: to quit; to acquit.
quietatio: exemption, discharge, acquittance.
quiete, quietum clamare: to quit claim, to renounce.
quietus: freed, acquitted, quit.
quietus redditus: quit rent.
quindecia. See quindena.
quindena: a quinzaine, fifteen days.
quinio: a bundle of five; a sheet made of five leaves.
quintale, quintallus: a weight used for metals, &c., varying from 96 lbs. to 120 lbs.
quintana: Quintaine, the first Sunday in Lent.
quintena: the game called quintain.
quinterna: a cittern.
quirea: the hounds' reward at the death of a stag (Fr. curée); a cuirass; something connected with a cart.
quirinarium: a quintain.
quisinum: a cushion.
quitancia: an acquittance; a quittance; a discharge.
quittacio. See quitancia.
quittare: to acquit; to remit.
quorespondens: used for correspondens.
quota: a share; a tax to be levied equally.
quota litis: a bribe received by a judge.
quotare: to divide into chapters; to repeat; to mark.
quotator: a chronicler.
quyschenus: a cushion.
109

