dimissio: demise, making over properties by lease or will.
dimissoriae literae: letters from a bishop for the ordination of a person in another diocese.
dioecesis: a diocese.
dirationare. See disrationare.
diribare: to take away.
dirmatia: for A.S. deornett, a hunting net (?).
disadvocare: to deny, to disavow.
disboscatio: bringing woods into cultivation.
discantus: a chant.
discare: to make dishes.
discarcare, discargare, discariare, discaricare, discarkare: to unlade, to discharge.
discifer: a sewer; a steward.
disclamare: to renounce a claim.
disclausus: open.
disconfortare: to cause uneasiness to.
discontinuare: to cease attendance.
discopulare: to uncouple; to let loose.
discrasia: a disease.
discredencia: unbelief, misbelief.
discrimen: the parting of the hair.
discus: a dish; a desk.
disfacere: to dismember, to mutilate.
disforceare. See deforciare.
disgerbigator: a haymaker.
disgradare: to take away a man's rank.
dishabilitare: to disable.
disheritor: one who deprives another of his inheritance.
diskippagium: unshipping.
disonerare: to discharge.
disparagare: to disparage; to marry to an inferior.
disparagatio: disparagement, marrying an heir or heiress below their degree.
dispensa: a warehouse.
dispensarius, dispensator: a steward.
dispensatorium: a steward's room.
dispersonare: to insult; to degrade.
displicare: to display.
disportum: amusement, sport.
disratiocinare. See disrationare.
disrationamentum: deraignment; proof.
disrationare: to prove; to deraign.
disrobare, disrobbare: to plunder.
dissaisina, disseisina: an unlawful dispossessing a man of his land; disseisin.
dissaisire, disseisire: to dispossess; to disseise.
dissaisitor, disseisitor: a disseisor.
dissignare: to break open a seal.
dissimulare: to refuse; to delay.
dissipare: to disappear, to scatter themselves.
distemperantia: disease.
distigius: a distych.
distillare: to drop; to distil.
distonatio: discord.
distreniatus: rigorous.
districtae: a strait; a defile.
districtio: distress.
districtus: tax; fine; territory.
distrigiare: to stride.
distringere: to distrain.
distringibilis: liable to distress.
disturbancia, disturbatio: disturbance.
disturbare: to send away; to disturb.
46

