chevacia selionum: the heads of the furrows.
chevagium: poll money paid by villeins to their lord, "ne vocentur per capita," or on their marriage or for
licence to leave his land; or to a man of power for his protection; also used for payment by the king at shrines.
chevalchia: cavalry; a cavalry expedition; military service as cavalry.
chevantia: a loan of money.
cheverillus: a cockerel; a roebuck.
cheveringus, chevero: a rafter; a joist; a chevron.
chevicia: a loan.
chevescia, cheviscae, chevitiae: heads of ploughed land, headrigs.
chevisare: to obtain by agreement.
cheviserum: a headstall.
chimenea: a chimney; a fireplace.
chimera: a riding cloak; a cope.
chiminachium, chiminagium. See cheminagium.
chiminus. See cheminus.
chintura: a strip of land.
chirographare: to grant by indenture.
chirographarius: a chirographer, writer of chirographs.
chirographum: a chirograph, a public instrument of conveyance, attested by witnesses; an indenture.
chirographus: an officer of the Common Pleas who engrosses fines.
chirotheca: a glove, a gauntlet.
chivagium: payment by nativi to their lord for liberty to leave his lordship. See chevagium.
choercere: for coercere.
chorepiscopus: a suffragan bishop.
chorista: a chorister.
chorus: the choir of a church; a crowth or crowd, a musical instrument of Wales and Scotland, played with a
bow.
chrisma: consecrated oil; any ceremony at which it is used, as extreme unction.
chrismale: the cloth laid over a child's head at baptism.
chrismatorium: a chrismatory, a vessel to contain consecrated oil.
Christicola, Christianicola: a Christian.
chrotta: a crowd, a fiddle.
chursetum: church scot.
chymera: for camera.
ciborium: a canopy or ceiler over the altar; a metal vessel to contain the sacramental bread.
cibutum: a meat safe.
ciccus: for siccus.
cicer: cider.
ciffus, cifus: a cup (scyphus).
cilicium: a hair shirt.
cillaba: a table dormant.
cimbia: a churn; a fillet.
cimeria: the crest on a helmet.
cimiflo: a stoker.
ciminum: cummin.
cindalum: cendale.
cindula, scindula: shingles, lath for roofing.
cingnottus, cingnotus: a cygnet.
cingula. See cindula.
cipha: a sieve, a measure of about 5 qrs.
cipharius: a cup maker.
ciphra: a cipher.
cippus: the stocks.
circa: a watchman.
circada, circata: a fee paid to the bishop or archdeacon at his visitation; church shot, a measure of corn or other
produce paid by each householder to the bishop.
circator: a person whose duty it was to to go the rounds, esp. in a cathedral or monastery.
circinatorium: a covering for the altar.
circinnare: to arrange in a circle.
circulare: to put hoops to; to turn.
32

