informator: a tutor.
infortiare: to fortify.
infossare: to surround with a ditch.
infra: further on, in a reference to a book or roll.
infraclusus. For inclusus.
infractura: breach; violation.
infraudulentus: without fraud.
infrontare: to stop.
infrontare sese: to resist.
infrunitas: madness.
infugare: to put to flight.
infula: a cassock; a coif.
infunditur: is flooded.
ingaignia: an engine; a machine; a trap.
ingenerabilis: without the power of procreation.
ingeniator: an engineer.
ingenium: a machine; an engine; a gin.
ingenuitas: freedom; nobility.
inglisheria: Englishry.
ingradatus: engrailed. See engrallatus.
ingrangiare: to deposit in a granary.
ingravare: to engrave; to demand.
ingrediatus: engrailed. See engrallatus.
ingressus: the relief paid by an heir on entering upon his lands.
ingrossare: to engross, to copy out fairly, or to buy up.
ingrossator: a copier; a wholesale dealer.
inguardus: a guard; a watchman.
inhabilitas: unwieldiness; unfitness; want of power.
inhokare, inhoc facere: to enclose.
inhokum: "any corner or part of a common field, ploughed up and sowed with oats, &c., and sometimes fenced
in with a dry hedge, in that year wherein the rest of the same field lies fallow and common" (Jacob).
inhospitatio: lodging.
inhundredum: the central portion of a hundred (?).
inimicare: to be at enmity with.
injuriatio: wrongdoing; injury.
inlagare: to restore to the benefit of the law.
inlagatio: the restitution of an outlaw.
inlagatus: one who is not an outlaw.
inlantale: demesne land.
inlegiare: to satisfy the law; to restore to the benefit of the law.
innamiare: to distrain.
innamium, innamum: a pledge. See namium.
innire: to inn, to carry corn or hay.
innocare: to enclose.
innocum. See inhokum.
innodare: to knot; to bind.
innodius: the nave of a wheel.
innonia: an enclosure.
innoxiare: to purge; to absolve.
inofficiare: to provide with the services of the church.
inordinatus: intestate.
inpennatus: feathered.
inprisius, inprisus: an adherent.
inquesta, inquestum, inquisitio: an inquest; an inquisition.
inquisitor: a sheriff, coroner, &c., who has power to hold inquests; a retriever.
inrotulare, inrollare: to enrol.
inscalare: to climb by ladder, to scale.
insectator: a prosecutor.
insellatus: unsaddled.
insertum opus: bonded masonry.
74

