actor: a proctor or advocate in civil courts.
actor dominicus: the bailiff or attorney of a lord.
actor ecclesiae: the advocate or pleading patron of a church.
actor villae: the steward or head bailiff of a town or village.
actornatus. See attornatus.
actuarius: the clerk who registers the acts of convocation.
acuarium: a needle case.
acucio: sharpening.
aculus, acula: an aglet, a metal tag.
acupatus: charged with (adculpatus).
acuperium: a whetstone.
acupictor: an embroiderer.
acusile: a trinket.
acustumabilis, acustumatus: liable to custom.
acustumare: to exact custom; to exempt from custom.
acuta: ague.
acutecula: a steel; a hone.
ad. Sometimes used for "at" not "to" a place.
adalingus: an etheling.
adaquare: to water (cattle); to drown.
adaquarium: a watering place.
adasia: a ewe.
adbreviare: to abridge.
adcredulitare: to purge oneself of an accusation by oath.
addictio: used for additio.
additio: a title setting forth a person's estate, degree, trade, &c.
addresciare, addressare: to redress; to restore; to make amends for; to render account of.
adirare: to lose.
adiratus: a compensation for goods lost or stolen.
adjacentia: neighbourhood; a thing near other.
adjectire: to cite.
adjornamentum, adjurnamentum: adjournment, putting off to another day or place.
adjornare: to adjourn.
adjudicatio: pronouncing a judgment or decree.
adjurnare: to adjourn.
adlegiare: to purge oneself of a crime by oath. (Fr. aleier.)
admensuratio: admeasurement, a writ for remedy against persons who usurp more than their share.
adminiculum, adminiculatio: aid, support.
admiraldus: an admiral.
admiraldus: sometimes used for emeraldus.
admiralis: an admiral.
admiralitas: admiralty.
admiralius, admirallus: an admiral.
admiravisus: an emir vizier.
admissionalis: an usher.
admissivus: an usher.
admonitor: a watch dog, "a wappe."
adnichilare, adnullare: to annul.
adquietare. See acquietare.
adramire. See arramire.
adrectare: to do right; to make amends.
adresciare. See addresciare.
adsecurare. See assecurare.
adulterinus: unlawful, esp. of castles and guilds.
adunare: to collect.
aduncare: to draw with a hook.
advallacio anguillarum: eelbucks.
advanciamentum: advancement.
advantagium: advantage; the right of the lord to redeem a fief removed by the vassal from his lordship.
adventale: a ventail or visor.
3

