Glossary of Latin Words
Found in Records and Other English Manuscripts, But
Not Occurring in Classical Authors.

A.
abaciscus: a small square tablet.
abactor: a cattle lifter, who steals sheep or cattle in herds, not singly.
abacus: a calculating board; and hence, arithmetic; a sideboard; a cupboard.
abandonnare: to permit or forbid by proclamation.
abandonum, abandum: anything sequestered, proscribed, pledged, or abandoned.
abarnare: to prove, legally, a secret crime.
abastardare: to bastardize.
abaso: an infirmary.
abatamentum: an entry by interposition.
abatare: to beat down; to defeat a writ or appeal; to enter into property void by death of the possessor before the
heir takes possession.
abatis: an officer who distributes corn, an avener or hostler; a ration of corn.
abator: a person who by interposition enters into property.
abatudus: diminished, esp. clipped, as money.
abbas: an abbot.
abbatatus: the office of abbot.
abbatia, abbathia: an abbey; the office of abbot.
abbatis. See abatis.
abbatissa: an abbess.
abbatizare: to be abbot.
abbayum: a milldam.
abbettamentum: abetment.
abbettare, abettare: to abet; to instigate.
abbettator: an abbettor.
abbettum: abetment.
abbottare: to abut, or bound.
abbreviamentum: an abridgement.
abbreviare: to abridge.
abbrocamentum: abbrochment, or forestalling a market or fair.
abbrocator: a forestaller; a broker.
abbuttare: to abut.
abcariare: to carry away.
abdicare: to renounce an office before the term of service has expired.
abditorium: a chest for keeping plate or relics.
abecedarium: an alphabet.
abecedarius: a scholar learning to read.
abecula: the back of a sword or knife.
aberemurdrum: manifest murder.
abettare, &c. See abbettare, &c.
abeyantia: abeyance. Property is in abeyance when it is in the expectation, in the intendment of the law, not in
actual possession.
abgatoria, abgetorium: the alphabet; rudiments of a science.
abhaeres: a future holder of property, not the next heir.
abiaticus: a nephew (aviaticus).
abigevus: a cattle stealer. See abactor.
abjectire: to be non-suited; to make default.
abjudicare: to take away by judicial sentence.
abjurare: to renounce the realm for ever.
ablactatus: weaned.
ablatum: a wafer. O.E. obley (oblata).
abra: a maidservant.
abrenunciatio: renunciation.
abrocagium: brokerage.
1

