recidiva: retribution.
recidivare: to fall back.
recitare: to revoke.
reckus. See reccus.
reclusa: an inclosure; an anchoress.
reclusagium: a cell.
reclusorium: a cell; a pound or pinfold.
reclusus: an anchorite.
reclutare: to reglue (reglutinare).
recognitio: acknowledgment; recognizance; recognition.
recognitor: one who enters into a recognizance; a juror impanelled on an assize; a recognisor, recognitor.
recognoscere: to acknowledge; to take cognizance of.
recokillatus: curled. (Fr. recoquillé.)
recollecta: gathering; harvest.
recommenda: recommendation.
recompensare: to repay, to recompense.
recordator: a recorder.
recordum: a record; a memorial.
recreantisa: recreancy.
recredencia: recreance, a provisional possession given to one of the parties till a suit be determined.
recta: right; jurisdiction.
rectare: to set straight; to cite, to accuse.
rectitudo: right in the sense of compensation.
rector: the rector of a parish, or college.
rectoria: a rectory; a rector's house.
recuperamen: a recovery.
recuperare: (subst.) recovery.
recuperatio: a recovery.
recussorium: a hammer.
recusum: rescue.
reddare: to clean, to scour (a river).
redditarium: a rental.
redditarius: a renter.
redditualis: rent (adj.).
redditus: rent.
redditus assisae or assisus: rent of assise.
redemptio: ransom.
redimere: to ransom, to purchase the freedom of; sometimes, to set free for a ransom.
redisseisina: redisseisin.
reditus, &c. See redditus.
refare: to rob, to deprive.
refectorarius: a caterer; a refectorer, refectioner.
refectorium: a refectory, fratry or frater; a dining-hall.
refeoffare: to enfeoff again.
referendarius: an officer who exhibits petitions to the king, Master of the Requests.
refletum: an osier bed.
refollum: the outlet of a pond; an overflow.
refortiuncula: a fortress.
refullum. See refollum.
refutancia. See refutatio.
refutatio: a quittance, a receipt.
rega terrae: a measure of land in Guienne. (Fr. rége.)
regale, regalia: royalty; the temporal rights of a bishop; some kingly ornament, that used by Henry III was of
white "diaspre" or silk.
regalitas: royalty.
regardare: to examine, to inspect; to regard.
regardator: the regarder of a forest.
regardere. See regardare.
regardor. See regardator.
111

