trencatum: a ditch; a trench.
trenchea, trencheia: the right of cutting wood; a trench.
trencheator: a carver.
trenchura: a slice.
trenga: a dray; a sledge.
trentale: an office of 30 masses said for the dead.
treparium: a trivet.
trepha. See trefa.
tresancia: a passage; a cloister; part of the cloister reserved for reading.
trescentia: rent or tax from land.
tresentia. See tresancia.
tressorium: a tress of hair; also some article of dress.
trestella, trestellus. a trestle.
trestornare: to turn aside.
trethinga. See tridingum.
treuga, treuia: a truce; tribute.
trialitas: a bull of "trialyte," allowing a clerk to hold three benefices.
triallum: trial.
trialogus: a conversation between three persons; the title of a book by John Wycliffe.
triare: to try; to select.
triatio: trial.
triator: a trier; a witness.
tribrica: braces.
tribuculus: a catapult; a trebuchet.
tribulagium: tribulage, a custom payable to the Crown on tin in Cornwall.
tricare: to hinder; to complain.
tricatura: twisted work (used of chain armour).
tricennale, tricennare: a trental.
tricesima: a trental, "month's mind."
triculator: a treasurer.
tridens: a harrow.
tridingum, tridlingum: a trithing, or riding, the third part of a shire.
triforiatus: having a triforium.
triforium: a thoroughfare; a gallery or arcade over the arches of the nave of a church.
trigeldum: a triple fine.
trigintale: a trental, a month's mind.
trillabus: a birdbolt.
trimagium. See tremagium.
trimestrium: a quarter of a year, three months.
trinoda necessitas: the threefold tax, for repairing bridges, maintaining castles, and repelling invasions.
triparium: a three-legged stool; a trivet.
triplarius: triple.
tripodium: a length of three feet.
triroda: three rods or perches.
trisancia. See tresancia.
trisilis: a three-legged stool.
trista: a place where hounds are posted during a deer drive; the service of placing or holding them there. See
Manwood, Part I., p. 86.
tristega, tristegum: a house of three stories; an engine used in sieges, consisting of a tower in three stories.
tristellum: a trestle.
tristra. See trista.
tritennale: a trental.
trithinga: a riding, a third of a county.
triturare: to thresh.
Trium Regum dies: Twelth day.
triumvir: a constable of three hundreds.
trivium: the study of grammar, logic, and rhetoric.
trochus: a cluster, a band, esp. of precious stones.
trocus: a top.
trogga: a trough; a measure of corn (Welsh).
135

