molitura, moltura: grinding; corn taken to a mill to be ground; grist; payment for grinding, multure; a lord's
right to make tenants grind at his mill.
molliare: to knead.
mollicio: grinding.
molneda: a millpool.
molta: toll paid by vassals for grinding corn at the lord's mill.
molumentum: toll for grinding.
molutus (molitus): ground.
monaca, monacha: a nun.
monachaliter: in monkish fashion.
monacare, monachare: to make a man a monk; to receive him into a convent.
monacus, monachus: a monk.
monagium: error for menagium.
monasterialis: monastic.
monasterium: a monastery, a minster.
moneta: money; a mint.
monetacio: coining, minting.
monetagium: mintage, right of coining; tribute paid by tenants to the lord that he should not change the money
he had coined.
monetare: to coin; to mint.
monetarius: a moneyer; a coiner; a banker.
monetatio: coining.
monetum: a mint.
moniale: a nunnery; a mullion.
monialis: a nun.
monstra: a muster.
monstrantia: a reliquary, a monstrance, or ooster.
monstrare: to muster.
monstratio: a muster.
monstrum: a muster; a reliquary.
moota: a seamew or seagull. (Fr. mouette.) See also mota, muta.
mora: a moor; a mere.
moracum: pure wine (merum). See moratum.
moragium: rent or service for tenure of moorland.
moratum: a drink, supposed to be wine flavoured with mulberries.
mordaculum: the tongue of a buckle.
moretum: brown cloth. See also moratum.
morgabulum: rent of moorland.
morgagium: mortgage.
morgagifa. See morganegiba.
morganegiba: the husband's gift to the wife on the wedding-day, or the day after.
moriatio: residence.
morina: murrain.
morosus: boggy; delaying.
morsella: a small piece [of land].
morsellatim: piecemeal.
morsellus. See morsella.
morsus: a morse; a clasp.
mortarium: mortar; a mortar; a stone or metal cup to hold a night light; a lamp over a grave or shrine. See also
mortuarium.
mortellum. See mortarium.
mortgagium: a mortgage.
morticinium: murrain.
mortificare: to alienate in mortgage.
mortitivus: dead of murrain.
mortizare. See amortizare.
mortua sesona: close time for foxes, in the forests, 1 May to 1 Sept.
mortuarium: a bequest to the testator's parish church in recompense for tithes not duly paid; a duty payable to
the lord on the death of a tenant.
mortuum vadium: a mortgage.
90

