conspirators and traitors. But indeed to give them credence by oaths and curses, that cannot be well maintained; for
those are too holy vestments for a disguise. Yet surely there was this further good in his employing of these flies and
familiars; that as the use of them was cause that many conspiracies were revealed, so the fame and suspicion of them
kept (no doubt) many conspiracies from being attempted.
7. Towards his Queen he was nothing uxorious; nor scarce indulgent; but companiable and respective, and without
jealousy. Towards his children he was full of paternal affection, careful of their education, aspiring to their high
advancement, regular to see that they should not want of any due honour and respect; but not greatly willing to cast any
popular lustre upon them.
8. To his counsel he did refer much, and sat oft in person; knowing it to be the way to assist his power and inform his
judgment: in which respect also he was fairly patient of liberty both of advice and of vote, till himself were declared.
He kept a strait hand on his nobility, and chose rather to advance clergymen and lawyers, which were more obsequious
to him, but had less interest in the people; which made for his absoluteness, but not his safety. Insomuch as I am
persuaded it was one of the causes of his troublesome reign. For that his nobles, though they were loyal and obedient,
yet did not cooperate with him, but let every man go his own way. He was not afraid of an able man, as Lewis the
Eleventh was. But contrariwise he was served by the ablest men that then were to be found; without which his affairs
could not have prospered as they did. For war, Bedford, Oxford, Surrey, Dawbeny, Brooke, Poynings. For other affairs,
Morton, Foxe, Bray, the Prior of Lanthony, Warham, Urswick, Hussey, Frowick and others. Neither did he care how
cunning they were that he did employ: for he thought himself to have the master-reach. And as he chose well, so held
them up well. For it is a strange thing, that though he were a dark prince, and infinitely suspicious, and his times full of
secret conspiracies and troubles; yet in twenty-four years reign he never put down or discomposed counsellor nor near
servant, save only Stanley the Lord Chamberlain. As for the disposition of his subjects in general towards him, it stood
thus with him; that of the three affections which naturally tie the hearts of the subjects to their sovereign, — love, fear,
and reverence,— he had the last in height; the second in good measure; and so little of the first, as he was beholding to
the other two.
9. He was a Prince, sad, serious, and full of thoughts and secret observations; and full of notes and memorials of his
own hand, especially touching persons; as whom to employ, whom to reward, whom to inquire of, whom to beware of,
what were the dependencies, what were the factions, and the like; keeping (as it were) a journal of his thoughts. There
is to this day a merry tale; that his monkey (set on as was thought by one of his chamber) tore his principal note-book
all to pieces, when by chance it lay forth: whereat the court which liked not those pensive accounts was almost tickled
with sport.
10. He was indeed full of apprehensions and suspicions. But as he did easily take them, so he did easily check them and
master them; whereby they were not dangerous, but troubled himself more than others. It is true, his thoughts were so
many, as they could not well always stand together; but that which did good one way, did hurt another. Neither did he
at some times weigh them aright in their proportions. Certainly that rumour which did him so much mischief (that the
Duke of York should be saved and alive) was (at the first) of his own nourishing, because he would have more reason
not to reign in the right of his wife. [11.] He was affable, and both well and fair spoken; and would use strange
sweetness and blandishments of words, where he desired to effect or persuade any thing that he took to heart. He was
rather studious than learned; reading most books that were of any worth, in the French tongue. Yet he understood the
Latin, as appeareth in that Cardinal Hadrian and others, who could very well have written French, did use to write to
him in Latin.
12. For his pleasures, there is no news of them. And yet by his instructions to Marsin and Stile touching the Queen of
Naples, it seemeth he could interrogate well touching beauty. He did by pleasures as great Princes do by banquets,
come and look a little while upon them, and turn way. For never Prince was more wholly given to his affairs, nor in
them more of himself: insomuch as in triumphs of justs [jousts] and tourneys and balls and masks (which they then
called disguises) he was rather a princely and gentle spectator than seemed much to be delighted.
13. No doubt, in him as in all men (and most of all Kings) his fortune wrought upon his nature, and his nature upon his
fortune. He attained to the crown, not only from a private fortune, which might endow him with moderation; but also
from the fortune of an exiled man, which had quickened in him all seeds of observation and industry. And his times
being rather prosperous than calm, had raised his confidence by success, but almost marred his nature by troubles. His
wisdom, by often evading from perils, was turned rather into a dexterity to deliver himself from dangers when they
pressed him, than into a providence to prevent and remove them afar off. And even in nature, the sight of his mind was
like some sights of eyes; rather strong at hand than to carry afar off. For his wit increased upon the occasion; and so
much the more if the occasion were sharpened by danger. Again, whether it were the shortness of his foresight, or the
strength of his will, or the dazzling of his suspicions, or what it was; certain it is that the perpetual troubles of his
fortunes (thre being no more matter out of which they grew) could not have been without some great defects and main
errors in his nature, customs, and proceedings, which he had enough to do to save and help with a thousand little

