time, save where the King was party; save also that the counsel-table intermeddled too much with meum and tuum. For
it was a very court of justice during his time; especially in the beginning. But in that part both of justice and policy
which is the durable part, and cut as it were in brass or marble, which is the making of good laws, he did excel. And
with his justice he was also a merciful prince: as in whose time there were but three of the nobility that suffered; the
Earl of Warwick; the Lord Chamberlain; and the Lord Audley: though the first two were instead of numbers in the
dislike and obloquy of the people. But there were never so great rebellions expiated with so little blood drawn by the
hand of justice, as the two rebellions of Blackheath and Exeter. As for the severity used upon those which were taken in
Kent, it was but upon a scum of people. His pardons went ever before and after his sword. But then he had withal a
strange kind of interchanging of large and inexpected pardons with severe executions: which (his wisdom considered)
could not be imputed to any inconstancy or inequality; but either to some reason which we do not know, or to a
principle he had set unto himself, that he would vary, and try both ways in turn. But the less blood he drew the more he
took of treasure: and as some construed it, he was the more sparing in the one that he might be the more pressing in the
other; for both would have been intolerable. Of nature assuredly he coveted to accumulate treasure; and was a little
poor in admiring riches. The people (into whom there is infused for the preservation of monarchies a natural desire to
discharge their princes, though it be with the unjust charge of their counsellors and ministers) did impute this unto
Cardinal Morton and Sir Reignold Bray; who as it after appeared (as counsellors of ancient authority with him) did so
second his humours, as neverthless they did temper them. Whereas Empson and Dudley that followed, being persons
that had no reputation with him otherwise than by the servile following of his bent, did not give way only (as the first
did) but shape him way to those extremities, for which himself was touched with remorse at his death; and which his
successor renounced and sought to purge. This excess of his had at that time many glosses and interpretations. Some
thought the continual rebellions wherewith he had been vexed had made him grow to hate his people: Some thought it
was done to pull down their stomachs and to keep them low: Some, for that he would leave his son a golden fleece:
Some suspected he had some high design upon foreign parts. But those perhaps shall come nearest the truth that fetch
not their reasons so far off; but rather impute it to nature, age, peace, and a mind fixed upon no other ambition or
pursuit: whereunto I should add, that having every day occasion to take notice of the necessities and shifts for money of
other great Princes abroad, it did the better by comparison set off to him the felicity of full coffers. As to his expending
of treasure, he never spared a charge which his affairs required: and in his buildings was magnificent; but his rewards
were very limited. So that his liberality was rather upon his own state and memory than upon the deserts of others.
[3.] He was of an high mind, and loved his own will and his own way; as one that revered himself, and would reign
indeed. Had he been a private man, he would have been termed proud: but in a wise Prince, it was but keeping of
distance; which indeed he did towards all; not admitting any near or full approach either to his power or to his secrets.
For he was governed by none. His mother he reverenced much, heard little. For any person agreeable to him for society
(such as Hastings to King Edward the Fourth, or Charles Brandon after to Henry the Eighth,) he had none; except we
should account for such persons Foxe and Bray and Empson, because they were so much with him. But it was but as
the instrument is much with the workman. He had nothing in him of vain-glory, but yet kept state and majesty to the
height; being sensible that majesty maketh the people bow, but vain-glory boweth to them.
4. To his confederates abroad he was constant and just; but not open. But rather such was his inquiry and such his
closeness, as they stood in the light towards him, and he stood in the dark to them; yet without strangeness, but with a
semblance of mutual communication of affairs. As for little envies or emulations upon foreign princes (which are
frequent with many Kings), he had never any; but went substantially to his own business. Certain it is, that though his
reputation was great at home, yet it was greater abroad. For foreigners that could not see the passges of affairs, but
made their judgments upon the issues of them, noted that he was ever in strife and ever aloft. It grew also from the airs
which the princes and states abroad received from their ambassadors and agents here; which were attending the court in
great number; whom he did not only content with courtesy, reward, and privateness; but (upon such conferences as
passed with them) put them in admiration to find his universal insight into the affairs of the world: which though he did
such chiefly from themselves, yet that which he had gathered from them all seemed admirable to every one. So that
they did write ever to their superiors in high terms concerning his wisdom and art of rule. Nay when they were
returned, they did commonly maintain intelligence with him; such a dexterity he had to impropriate to himself all
foreign instruments.
5. He was careful and liberal to obtain good intelligence from all parts abroad; wherein he did not only use his interest
in the liegers [dipolomats] here, and his pensioners which he had both in the court of Rome and other the courts of
Christendom, but the industry and vigilancy of his own ambassadors in foreign parts. For which purpose his
instructions were ever extreme curious and articulate; and in them more articles touching inquisition than touching
negotiation: requiring likewise from his ambassadors an answer, in particular distinct articles, respectively to his
quetions.
6. As for his secret spials which he did employ both at home and abroad, by them to discover what practices and
conspiracies were against him; surely his case required it; he had such moles perpetually working and casting to
undermine him. Neither can it be reprehended; for if spials be lawful against lawful enemies, much more against

