industries and watches. But those do best appear in the story itself. Yet take him with all his defects, if a man should
compare him with the Kings his concurrents in France and Spain, he shall find him more politic than Lewis the Twelfth
of France, and more entire and sincere than Ferdinando of Spain. But if you shall change Lewis the Twelfth for Lewis
the Eleveth, who lived a little before, then the consort is more perfect. For that Lewis the Eleventh, Ferdinando, and
Henry, may be estemmed for the tres magi [three wise men] of kings of those ages. To conclude, if this King did no
greater matters, it was long of himself [his responsibility]; for what he minded he compassed.
14. He was a comely personage, a little above just stature, well and straght limbed, but slender. His countenance was
reverend, and a little like a churchman: and as it was not strange or dark, so neither was it winning or pleasing, but as
the face of one well disposed. But it was to the disadvantage of the painter, for it was best when he spake.
15. His worth may bear a tale or two, that may put upon him somewhat that may seem divine. When the Lady Margaret
his mother had divers great suitors for marriage, she dreamed one night that one in the likeness of a bishop in pontifical
habit did tender her Edmund Earl of Richmond (the King’s father) for her husband. Neither had she ever any child but
the King, though she had three husbands. One day when King Henry the Sixth (whose innocency gave him holiness)
was washing his hands at a great feast, and cast his eye upon King Henry, then a young youth, he said, “This is the lad
that shall posssess quietly that that we now strive for.” But that that was truly divine in him, was that he had the fortune
of a true Christian as well as of a great King, in living exercised and dying repentant. So as he had a happy warfare in
both conflicts, both of sin and the cross.
16. He was born at Pembroke Castle, and lieth buried at Westminster, in one of the stateliest and daintiest monuments
of Europe, both for the chapel and the sepulchre. So that he dwelleth more richly dead, in the monument of his tomb,
than he did alive in Richmond or any of his palaces. I could wish he did the like in this monument of his fame.
Finis

