Maina Flu.: The Mintern, Dorset.
Maionensis: Of Mayo.
Malaca: Isle of Mull.
Mala Platea: Near Wenlock, Shropshire.
Malbanus Vicus, Vicus Malbus: Wyz Mauban, Nantwich, Cheshire.
Malcolicum: Mallow, co. Cork.
Maldunense Coenobium: Malmesbury Abbey, Wilts.
Malea Platea: Ill Street, Cheshire.
Malesbergia: Marlborough, Wilts.
Maleos: Isle of Mull, west of Scotland.
Malmesbiria: Malmesbury.
Malum Oppidum: Yeovil, Somerset.
Malus Passus: Malpas, Cheshire.
Maluerna, Maluernia, Maluernum: Malvern, Worcestershire.
Mameceastra: Manchester, Lancashire.
Mamucium: Manchester.
Manapia: Wicklow, or Wexford, Ireland.
Manaui. See Meneuia.
Mancunium: Manchester.
Manduessedum: Mancetter, or Kenilworth, Warwickshire.
Mania, Manna, Mannia: The Isle of Man.
Mannechestria: Mancetter, Warwickshire.
Mantauis: St. David's, Pembrokeshire.
Mantio: Manchester.
Manucium: Manchester.
Mara, Foresta de: Delamere Forest, Cheshire.
Marawuda: Marwood, Durham.
Marchenium: Roxburgh.
Marchia: March, or Mers, Scotland.
Marchia Walliae: The Marches or Borders of Wales.
Marchidunum: Roxburgh.
Marcotaxon: A town north of the Wall of Antonine.
Mare Britannicum: The English Channel.
Mare Caledonium: The Scotch Sea.
Mare Hibernicum: The Irish Channel.
Mare Sabrinianum: The Severn Sea.
Mare Virginium, Verginium: The sea on the south of Ireland.
Margaberga: Marlborough, Wilts.
Margidunum, Margitudum: East Bridgeford, Notts; or Mount Sorrel, Leicestershire.
Maridunum: Caermarthen.
Mariscallia: The Marshalsea, London.
Marlebrigia: Marlborough.
Marnia: Mearns, Kincardine, Scotland.
Marria: Marr, Aberdeen, Scotland.
Martona: Merton, Surrey.
Masona: A town probably in Devonshire.
Massamensis Pons: Masham Bridge, Yorks.
Matillis Castellum: Painscastle, Herefordshire.
Matouion: A town north of the Wall of Antonine.
Mauditi Castrum: St. Mawe's Castle, Cornwall.
Maulion: A town north of the Wall of Antonine.
Mauordina: Marden, Herefordshire.
Mauia: River Maw, Merionethshire.
Mauritanea: probably Llanbadarn Vaur, Cardiganshire.
Mauthia: Meath, Ireland.
Maxima Caesariensis: Province of Britain, north of the Humber and Ribble, and south of Tyne; or the Scotch
Highlands, north of the Wall of Severus.
Mealdunum: Maldon, Essex.
Mealmesbiria: Malmesbury.
Mealtuna: Malton, Yorks.
35

